<h3>VATHEK</h3>

<p>Vathek, ninth caliph<a href="#Note_195a" name="Note_1" id="Note_1" class="nanchor">*</a> of the race of the Abassides, was the son
of Motassem, and the grandson of Haroun al Raschid. From an
early accession to the throne, and the talents he possessed to
adorn it, his subjects were induced to expect that his reign
would be long and happy. His figure was pleasing and majestic:
but when he was angry, one of his eyes became so terrible,
that no person could bear to behold it; and the wretch upon
whom it was fixed instantly fell backward, and sometimes
expired. For fear, however, of depopulating his dominions
and making his palace desolate, he but rarely gave way to
his anger.</p>

<p>Being much addicted to women and the pleasures of the table,
he sought by his affability to procure agreeable companions;
and he succeeded the better as his generosity was unbounded
and his indulgences unrestrained: for he did not think, with
the Caliph Omar Ben Abdalaziz,<a href="#Note_195b" name="Note_2" id="Note_2" class="nanchor">*</a> that it was necessary to make
a hell of this world to enjoy paradise in the next.</p>

<p>He surpassed in magnificence all his predecessors. The
palace of Alkoremi, which his father, Motassem, had erected
on the hill of Pied Horses, and which commanded the whole
city of Samarah,<a href="#Note_195c" name="Note_3" id="Note_3" class="nanchor">*</a> was, in his idea, far too scanty: he added,
therefore, five wings, or rather other palaces, which he destined
for the particular gratification of each of the senses.</p>

<p>In the first of these were tables continually covered with the
most exquisite dainties; which were supplied both by night and
by day, according to their constant consumption; whilst the
most delicious wines and the choicest cordials flowed forth
from a hundred fountains that were never exhausted. This
palace was called <i>The Eternal or Unsatiating Banquet</i>.</p>

<p>The second was styled <i>The Temple of Melody, or the Nectar
of the Soul</i>. It was inhabited by the most skilful musicians
and admired poets of the time; who not only displayed their
talents within, but dispersing in bands without, caused every
surrounding scene to reverberate their songs, which were
continually varied in the most delightful succession.<a href="#Note_195d" name="Note_4" id="Note_4" class="nanchor">*</a></p>

<p>
The palace named <i>The Delight of the Eyes, or the Support
of Memory</i>, was one entire enchantment. Rarities, collected
from every corner of the earth, were there found in such profusion
as to dazzle and confound, but for the order in which
they were arranged. One gallery exhibited the pictures of the
celebrated Mani,<a href="#Note_196a" name="Note_5" id="Note_5" class="nanchor">*</a> and statues that seemed to be alive. Here
a well-managed perspective attracted the sight; there the magic
of optics agreeably deceived it: whilst the naturalist, on his
part, exhibited in their several classes the various gifts that
Heaven had bestowed on our globe. In a word, Vathek omitted
nothing in this palace that might gratify the curiosity of those
who resorted to it, although he was not able to satisfy his
own; for, of all men, he was the most curious.</p>

<p><i>The Palace of Perfumes</i>, which was termed likewise <i>The
Incentive to Pleasure</i>, consisted of various halls, where the
different perfumes which the earth produces were kept perpetually
burning in censers of gold. Flambeaux and aromatic
lamps were here lighted in open day. But the too powerful
effects of this agreeable delirium might be alleviated by descending
into an immense garden, where an assemblage of every
fragrant flower diffused through the air the purest odours.</p>

<p>The fifth palace, denominated <i>The Retreat of Mirth, or the
Dangerous</i>, was frequented by troops of young females, beautiful
as the Houris,<a href="#Note_196b" name="Note_6" id="Note_6" class="nanchor">*</a> and not less seducing; who never failed to receive,
with caresses, all whom the caliph allowed to approach them
and enjoy a few hours of their company.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding the sensuality in which Vathek indulged,
he experienced no abatement in the love of his people, who
thought that a sovereign giving himself up to pleasure was as
able to govern as one who declared himself an enemy to it.
But the unquiet and impetuous disposition of the caliph would
not allow him to rest there. He had studied so much for his
amusement in the lifetime of his father, as to acquire a great
deal of knowledge, though not a sufficiency to satisfy himself;
for he wished to know everything; even sciences that did not
exist. He was fond of engaging in disputes with the learned,
but did not allow them to push their opposition with warmth.
He stopped with presents the mouths of those whose mouths
could be stopped; whilst others, whom his liberality was unable
to subdue, he sent to prison to cool their blood, a remedy
that often succeeded.</p>

<p>Vathek discovered also a predilection for theological controversy;
but it was not with the orthodox that he usually held.<a href="#Note_196c" name="Note_7" id="Note_7" class="nanchor">*</a>

By this means he induced the zealots to oppose him, and then
persecuted them in return; for he resolved, at any rate, to have
reason on his side.</p>

<p>The great prophet, Mahomet, whose vicars the caliphs are,
beheld with indignation from his abode in the seventh heaven<a href="#Note_197a" name="Note_8" id="Note_8" class="nanchor">*</a>
the irreligious conduct of such a vicegerent. “Let us leave him
to himself,” said he to the Genii,<a href="#Note_197b" name="Note_9" id="Note_9" class="nanchor">*</a> who are always ready to
receive his commands: “let us see to what lengths his folly and
impiety will carry him: if he run into excess, we shall know
how to chastise him. Assist him, therefore, to complete the
tower<a href="#Note_197c" name="Note_10" id="Note_10" class="nanchor">*</a> which, in imitation of Nimrod, he hath begun; not, like
that great warrior, to escape being drowned, but from the
insolent curiosity of penetrating the secrets of heaven:—he will
not divine the fate that awaits him.”</p>

<p>The Genii obeyed; and, when the workmen had raised their
structure a cubit in the daytime, two cubits more were added
in the night. The expedition with which the fabric arose
was not a little flattering to the vanity of Vathek: he fancied
that even insensible matter showed a forwardness to subserve
his designs; not considering that the successes of the foolish
and wicked form the first rod of their chastisement.</p>

<p>His pride arrived at its height when, having ascended, for
the first time, the fifteen hundred stairs of his tower, he cast
his eyes below, and beheld men not larger than pismires; mountains,
than shells; and cities, than bee-hives. The idea which
such an elevation inspired of his own grandeur completely
bewildered him: he was almost ready to adore himself; till,
lifting his eyes upward, he saw the stars as high above him
as they appeared when he stood on the surface of the earth.</p>

<p>He consoled himself, however, for this intruding and unwelcome
perception of his littleness, with the thought of being
great in the eyes of others; and flattered himself that the light
of his mind would extend beyond the reach of his sight, and
extort from the stars the decrees of his destiny.</p>

<p>With this view, the inquisitive prince passed most of his
nights on the summit of his tower, till becoming an adept in
the mysteries of astrology, he imagined that the planets had
disclosed to him the most marvellous adventures, which were
to be accomplished by an extraordinary personage, from a
country altogether unknown. Prompted by motives of curiosity,
he had always been courteous to strangers; but, from this
instant, he redoubled his attention, and ordered it to be
announced, by sound of trumpet, through all the streets of
Samarah, that no one of his subjects, on peril of his displeasure,
should either lodge or detain a traveller, but forthwith bring
him to the palace.</p>

<p>Not long after this proclamation, arrived in his metropolis a
man so abominably hideous, that the very guards who arrested
him were forced to shut their eyes as they led him along: the
caliph himself appeared startled at so horrible a visage; but
joy succeeded to this emotion of terror, when the stranger
displayed to his view such rarities as he had never before seen,<a href="#Note_198a" name="Note_11" id="Note_11" class="nanchor">*</a>
and of which he had no conception.</p>

<p>In reality, nothing was ever so extraordinary as the merchandise
this stranger produced; most of his curiosities, which
were not less admirable for their workmanship than splendour,
had, besides, their several virtues described on a parchment
fastened to each. There were slippers, which, by spontaneous
springs, enabled the feet to walk; knives, that cut without
motion of the hand; sabres, that dealt the blow at the person
they were wished to strike; and the whole enriched with gems
that were hitherto unknown.</p>

<p>The sabres especially, the blades of which emitted a dazzling
radiance, fixed, more than all the rest, the caliph’s attention;
who promised himself to decipher, at his leisure, the uncouth
characters<a href="#Note_198b" name="Note_12" id="Note_12" class="nanchor">*</a> engraven on their sides. Without, therefore,
demanding their price, he ordered all the coined gold to be
brought from his treasury, and commanded the merchant to
take what he pleased. The stranger obeyed, took little, and
remained silent.</p>

<p>Vathek, imagining that the merchant’s taciturnity was
occasioned by the awe which his presence inspired, encouraged
him to advance, and asked him, with an air of condescension,
who he was? whence he came? and where he obtained such
beautiful commodities? The man, or rather monster, instead
of making a reply, thrice rubbed his forehead, which, as well as
his body, was blacker than ebony; four times clapped his paunch,
the projection of which was enormous; opened wide his huge
eyes, which glowed like firebrands; began to laugh with a
hideous noise, and discovered his long amber-coloured teeth,
bestreaked with green.</p>

<p>The caliph, though a little startled, renewed his inquiries,
but without being able to procure a reply. At which, beginning
to be ruffled, he exclaimed, “Knowest thou, wretch, who I
am, and at whom thou art aiming thy gibes?”—Then, addressing
his guards, “Have ye heard him speak?—is he dumb?”—“He
hath spoken,” they replied, “but to no purpose.”—“Let
him speak then again,” said Vathek, “and tell me who he is,
from whence he came, and where he procured these singular
curiosities; or I swear, by the ass of Balaam, that I will make
him rue his pertinacity.”</p>

<p>This menace was accompanied by one of the caliph’s angry
and perilous glances, which the stranger sustained without the
slightest emotion; although his eyes were fixed on the terrible
eye of the prince.</p>

<p>No words can describe the amazement of the courtiers, when
they beheld this rude merchant withstand the encounter
unshocked. They all fell prostrate with their faces on the
ground, to avoid the risk of their lives; and would have continued
in the same abject posture, had not the caliph exclaimed,
in a furious tone, “Up, cowards! seize the miscreant! see that
he be committed to prison, and guarded by the best of my
soldiers! Let him, however, retain the money I gave him; it
is not my intent to take from him his property; I only want
him to speak.”</p>

<p>No sooner had he uttered these words, than the stranger was
surrounded, pinioned, and bound with strong fetters, and
hurried away to the prison of the great tower, which was encompassed
by seven empalements of iron bars, and armed with
spikes in every direction, longer and sharper than spits. The
caliph, nevertheless, remained in the most violent agitation.
He sat down indeed to eat; but, of the three hundred dishes
that were daily placed before him, he could taste of no more
than thirty-two.</p>

<p>A diet to which he had been so little accustomed was sufficient
of itself to prevent him from sleeping; what then must
be its effect when joined to the anxiety that preyed upon
his spirits? At the first glimpse of dawn he hastened to the
prison, again to importune this intractable stranger; but the
rage of Vathek exceeded all bounds on finding the prison empty,
the grates burst asunder, and his guards lying lifeless around
him. In the paroxysm of his passion he fell furiously on the
poor carcasses, and kicked them till evening without intermission.
His courtiers and viziers exerted their efforts to soothe
his extravagance; but, finding every expedient ineffectual, they
all united in one vociferation, “The caliph is gone mad! the
caliph is out of his senses!”</p>

<p>This outcry, which soon resounded through the streets of
Samarah, at length reached the ears of Carathis, his mother,
who flew in the utmost consternation to try her ascendency on
the mind of her son. Her tears and caresses called off his
attention; and he was prevailed upon, by her entreaties, to be
brought back to the palace.</p>

<p>Carathis, apprehensive of leaving Vathek to himself, had him
put to bed; and, seating herself by him, endeavoured by her
conversation to appease and compose him. Nor could any one
have attempted it with better success; for the caliph not only
loved her as a mother, but respected her as a person of superior
genius. It was she who had induced him, being a Greek herself,
to adopt the sciences and systems of her country, which all good
Mussulmans hold in such thorough abhorrence.</p>

<p>Judicial astrology was one of those sciences in which Carathis
was a perfect adept. She began, therefore, with reminding her
son of the promise which the stars had made him; and intimated
an intention of consulting them again. “Alas!” said the caliph
as soon as he could speak, “what a fool I have been! not for
having bestowed forty thousand kicks on my guards, who so
tamely submitted to death; but for never considering that this
extraordinary man was the same that the planets had foretold;
whom, instead of ill-treating, I should have conciliated by all
the arts of persuasion.”</p>

<p>“The past,” said Carathis, “cannot be recalled; but it
behoves us to think of the future: perhaps you may again see
the object you so much regret: it is possible the inscriptions on
the sabres will afford information. Eat, therefore, and take
thy repose, my dear son. We will consider, to-morrow, in
what manner to act.”</p>

<p>Vathek yielded to her counsel as well as he could, and arose
in the morning with a mind more at ease. The sabres he
commanded to be instantly brought; and, poring upon them,
through a coloured glass, that their glittering might not dazzle,
he set himself in earnest to decipher the inscriptions; but his
reiterated attempts were all of them nugatory: in vain did he
beat his head, and bite his nails; not a letter of the whole was
he able to ascertain. So unlucky a disappointment would have
undone him again, had not Carathis, by good fortune, entered
the apartment.</p>

<p>“Have patience, my son!” said she: “you certainly are
possessed of every important science; but the knowledge of
languages is a trifle at best, and the accomplishment of none
but a pedant. Issue a proclamation, that you will confer such
rewards as become your greatness upon any one that shall
interpret what you do not understand, and what is beneath you
to learn; you will soon find your curiosity gratified.”</p>

<p>“That may be,” said the caliph; “but, in the meantime,
I shall be horribly disgusted by a crowd of smatterers, who will
come to the trial as much for the pleasure of retailing their
jargon as from the hope of gaining the reward. To avoid this
evil, it will be proper to add, that I will put every candidate to
death, who shall fail to give satisfaction; for, thank Heaven!
I have skill enough to distinguish, whether one translates or
invents.”</p>

<p>“Of that I have no doubt,” replied Carathis; “but to put
the ignorant to death is somewhat severe, and may be productive
of dangerous effects. Content yourself with commanding their
beards to be burnt: beards in a state are not quite so essential
as men.”</p>

<p>The caliph submitted to the reasons of his mother; and,
sending for Morakanabad, his prime vizier, said, “Let the
common criers proclaim, not only in Samarah, but throughout
every city in my empire, that whosoever will repair hither and
decipher certain characters which appear to be inexplicable,
shall experience that liberality for which I am renowned; but
that all who fail upon trial shall have their beards burnt off<a href="#Note_201a" name="Note_13" id="Note_13" class="nanchor">*</a>
to the last hair. Let them add, also, that I will bestow fifty
beautiful slaves, and as many jars of apricots from the Isle
of Kirmith, upon any man that shall bring me intelligence of
the stranger.”</p>

<p>The subjects of the caliph, like their sovereign, being great
admirers of women and apricots from Kirmith, felt their mouths
water at these promises, but were totally unable to gratify their
hankering; for no one knew what had become of the stranger.</p>

<p>As to the caliph’s other requisition, the result was different.
The learned, the half-learned, and those who were neither,
but fancied themselves equal to both, came boldly to hazard
their beards, and all shamefully lost them. The exaction of
these forfeitures, which found sufficient employment for the
eunuchs, gave them such a smell of singed hair as greatly to
disgust the ladies of the seraglio, and to make it necessary
that this new occupation of their guardians should be transferred
to other hands.</p>

<p>At length, however, an old man presented himself, whose
beard was a cubit and a half longer than any that had appeared
before him. The officers of the palace whispered to each other,
as they ushered him in, “What a pity, oh! what a great pity
that such a beard should be burnt!” Even the caliph, when he
saw it, concurred with them in opinion; but his concern was
entirely needless. This venerable personage read the characters
with facility, and explained them verbatim as follows: “We
were made where everything is well made: we are the least
of the wonders of a place where all is wonderful, and deserving
the sight of the first potentate on earth.”</p>

<p>“You translate admirably!” cried Vathek; “I know to what
these marvellous characters allude. Let him receive as many
robes of honour and thousands of sequins of gold as he hath
spoken words. I am in some measure relieved from the perplexity
that embarrassed me!” Vathek invited the old man
to dine, and even to remain some days in the palace.</p>

<p>Unluckily for him, he accepted the offer; for the caliph, having
ordered him next morning to be called, said: “Read again to
me what you have read already; I cannot hear too often the
promise that is made me—the completion of which I languish
to obtain.” The old man forthwith put on his green spectacles,<a href="#Note_202a" name="Note_14" id="Note_14" class="nanchor">*</a>
but they instantly dropped from his nose, on perceiving that
the characters he had read the day preceding had given place
to others of different import. “What ails you?” asked the
caliph; “and why these symptoms of wonder?”—“Sovereign
of the world!” replied the old man, “these sabres hold another
language to-day from that they yesterday held.”—“How say
you?” returned Vathek:—“but it matters not; tell me, if you
can, what they mean.”—“It is this, my lord,” rejoined the old
man: “‘Woe to the rash mortal who seeks to know that of
which he should remain ignorant; and to undertake that which
surpasseth his power!’”—“And woe to thee!” cried the caliph,
in a burst of indignation: “to-day thou art void of understanding:
begone from my presence, they shall burn but the half of
thy beard, because thou wert yesterday fortunate in guessing:—my
gifts I never resume.” The old man, wise enough to
perceive he had luckily escaped, considering the folly of disclosing
so disgusting a truth, immediately withdrew and appeared
not again.</p>

<p>But it was not long before Vathek discovered abundant
reason to regret his precipitation; for, though he could not
decipher the characters himself, yet, by constantly poring upon
them, he plainly perceived that they every day changed; and,
unfortunately, no other candidate offered to explain them.
This perplexing occupation inflamed his blood, dazzled his
sight, and brought on such a giddiness and debility that he
could hardly support himself. He failed not, however, though
in so reduced a condition, to be often carried to his tower, as
he flattered himself that he might there read in the stars, which
he went to consult, something more congruous to his wishes:
but in this his hopes were deluded; for his eyes, dimmed by the
vapours of his head, began to subserve his curiosity so ill, that
he beheld nothing but a thick, dun cloud, which he took for
the most direful of omens.</p>

<p>Agitated with so much anxiety, Vathek entirely lost all
firmness; a fever seized him, and his appetite failed. Instead
of being one of the greatest eaters, he became as distinguished
for drinking. So insatiable was the thirst which tormented
him, that his mouth, like a funnel, was always open to receive
the various liquors that might be poured into it, and especially
cold water, which calmed him more than any other.</p>

<p>This unhappy prince, being thus incapacitated for the enjoyment
of any pleasure, commanded the palaces of the five senses
to be shut up; forbore to appear in public, either to display
his magnificence or administer justice, and retired to the inmost
apartment of his harem. As he had ever been an excellent
husband, his wives, overwhelmed with grief at his deplorable
situation, incessantly supplied him with prayers for his health,
and water for his thirst.</p>

<p>In the mean time the Princess Carathis, whose affliction no
words can describe, instead of confining herself to sobbing and
tears, was closeted daily with the vizier Morakanabad, to find
out some cure, or mitigation, of the caliph’s disease. Under
the persuasion that it was caused by enchantment, they turned
over together, leaf by leaf, all the books of magic that might
point out a remedy; and caused the horrible stranger, whom
they accused as the enchanter, to be everywhere sought for
with the strictest diligence.</p>

<p>At the distance of a few miles from Samarah stood a high
mountain, whose sides were swarded with wild thyme and
basil, and its summit overspread with so delightful a plain,
that it might have been taken for the paradise destined for the
faithful. Upon it grew a hundred thickets of eglantine and
other fragrant shrubs; a hundred arbours of roses, entwined
with jessamine and honeysuckle; as many clumps of orange
trees, cedar, and citron; whose branches, interwoven with the
palm, the pomegranate, and the vine, presented every luxury
that could regale the eye or the taste. The ground was strewed
with violets, harebells, and pansies; in the midst of which
numerous tufts of jonquils, hyacinths, and carnations perfumed
the air. Four fountains, not less clear than deep, and so
abundant as to slake the thirst of ten armies, seemed purposely
placed here to make the scene more resemble the garden of
Eden watered by four sacred rivers. Here, the nightingale
sang the birth of the rose, her well-beloved, and, at the same
time, lamented its short-lived beauty: whilst the dove deplored
the loss of more substantial pleasures; and the wakeful lark
hailed the rising light that reanimates the whole creation.
Here, more than anywhere, the mingled melodies of birds
expressed the various passions which inspired them; and the
exquisite fruits which they pecked at pleasure seemed to have
given them a double energy.</p>

<p>To this mountain Vathek was sometimes brought, for the
sake of breathing a purer air; and, especially, to drink at will
of the four fountains. His attendants were his mother, his
wives, and some eunuchs, who assiduously employed themselves
in filling capacious bowls of rock crystal, and emulously presenting
them to him. But it frequently happened that his avidity
exceeded their zeal, insomuch that he would prostrate himself
upon the ground to lap the water, of which he could never
have enough.</p>

<p>One day, when this unhappy prince had been long lying in
so debasing a posture, a voice, hoarse but strong, thus addressed
him: “Why dost thou assimilate thyself to a dog, O caliph,
proud as thou art of thy dignity and power?” At this apostrophe,
he raised up his head, and beheld the stranger that
had caused him so much affliction. Inflamed with anger at the
sight, he exclaimed, “Accursed Giaour!<a href="#Note_204a" name="Note_15" id="Note_15" class="nanchor">*</a> what comest thou
hither to do?—is it not enough to have transformed a prince
remarkable for his agility into a water budget? Perceivest
thou not, that I may perish by drinking to excess, as well as by
thirst?”</p>

<p>“Drink, then, this draught,” said the stranger, as he presented
to him a phial of a red and yellow mixture: “and, to
satiate the thirst of thy soul as well as of thy body, know that
I am an Indian, but from a region of India which is wholly
unknown.”</p>

<p>The caliph, delighted to see his desires accomplished in part,
and flattering himself with the hope of obtaining their entire
fulfilment, without a moment’s hesitation swallowed the potion,
and instantaneously found his health restored, his thirst appeased,
and his limbs as agile as ever. In the transports of his joy,
Vathek leaped upon the neck of the frightful Indian, and kissed
his horrid mouth and hollow cheeks, as though they had been
the coral lips and the lilies and roses of his most beautiful wives.</p>

<p>Nor would these transports have ceased had not the eloquence
of Carathis repressed them. Having prevailed upon him to
return to Samarah, she caused a herald to proclaim as loudly
as possible: “The wonderful stranger hath appeared again;
he hath healed the caliph; he hath spoken! he hath spoken!”</p>

<p>Forthwith, all the inhabitants of this vast city quitted their
habitations, and ran together in crowds to see the procession
of Vathek and the Indian, whom they now blessed as much
as they had before execrated, incessantly shouting, “He
hath healed our sovereign; he hath spoken! he hath spoken!”
Nor were these words forgotten in the public festivals which
were celebrated the same evening, to testify the general joy;
for the poets applied them as a chorus to all the songs they
composed on this interesting subject.</p>

<p>The caliph, in the meanwhile, caused the palaces of the senses
to be again set open; and, as he found himself naturally prompted
to visit that of taste in preference to the rest, immediately
ordered a splendid entertainment, to which his great officers
and favourite courtiers were all invited. The Indian, who was
placed near the prince, seemed to think that, as a proper acknowledgment
of so distinguished a privilege, he could neither eat,
drink, nor talk too much. The various dainties were no sooner
served up than they vanished, to the great mortification of
Vathek, who piqued himself on being the greatest eater alive,
and at this time in particular was blessed with an excellent
appetite.</p>

<p>The rest of the company looked round at each other in
amazement; but the Indian, without appearing to observe it,
quaffed large bumpers to the health of each of them; sung in a
style altogether extravagant; related stories, at which he laughed
immoderately, and poured forth extemporaneous verses, which
would not have been thought bad, but for the strange grimaces
with which they were uttered. In a word, his loquacity was
equal to that of a hundred astrologers; he ate as much as a
hundred porters, and caroused in proportion.</p>

<p>The caliph, notwithstanding the table had been thirty-two
times covered, found himself incommoded by the voraciousness
of his guest, who was now considerably declined in the
prince’s esteem. Vathek, however, being unwilling to betray
the chagrin he could hardly disguise, said in a whisper to
Bababalouk, the chief of his eunuchs:<a href="#Note_206a" name="Note_16" id="Note_16" class="nanchor">*</a> “You see how enormous
his performances are in every way; what would be the consequence
should he get at my wives!—Go! redouble your
vigilance, and be sure look well to my Circassians, who would
be more to his taste than all of the rest.”</p>

<p>The bird of the morning had thrice renewed his song, when
the hour of the divan<a href="#Note_206b" name="Note_17" id="Note_17" class="nanchor">*</a> was announced. Vathek, in gratitude
to his subjects having promised to attend, immediately arose
from table and repaired thither, leaning upon his vizier, who
could scarce support him; so disordered was the poor prince by
the wine he had drunk, and still more by the extravagant
vagaries of his boisterous guest.</p>

<p>The viziers, the officers of the crown and of the law, arranged
themselves in a semicircle<a href="#Note_206c" name="Note_18" id="Note_18" class="nanchor">*</a> about their sovereign, and preserved
a respectful silence; whilst the Indian, who looked as cool as
if he had been fasting, sat down without ceremony on one of
the steps of the throne, laughing in his sleeve at the indignation
with which his temerity had filled the spectators.</p>

<p>The caliph, however, whose ideas were confused, and whose
head was embarrassed, went on administering justice at haphazard;
till at length the prime vizier,<a href="#Note_206d" name="Note_19" id="Note_19" class="nanchor">*</a> perceiving his situation,
hit upon a sudden expedient to interrupt the audience and
rescue the honour of his master, to whom he said in a whisper,
“My lord, the Princess Carathis, who hath passed the night in
consulting the planets, informs you that they portend you
evil, and the danger is urgent. Beware lest this stranger,
whom you have so lavishly recompensed for his magical gewgaws,
should make some attempt on your life: his liquor, which
at first had the appearance of effecting your cure, may be no
more than a poison, the operation of which will be sudden.
Slight not this surmise; ask him, at least, of what it was compounded,
whence he procured it; and mention the sabres which
you seem to have forgotten.”</p>

<p>Vathek, to whom the insolent airs of the stranger became
every moment less supportable, intimated to his vizier, by a
wink of acquiescence, that he would adopt his advice; and,
at once turning towards the Indian, said, “Get up, and declare
in full divan of what drugs was compounded the liquor you
enjoined me to take, for it is suspected to be poison: give also
that explanation I have so earnestly desired concerning the
sabres you sold me, and thus show your gratitude for the favours
heaped on you.”</p>

<p>Having pronounced these words in as moderate a tone
as he well could, he waited in silent expectation for an answer.
But the Indian, still keeping his seat, began to renew his loud
shouts of laughter, and exhibit the same horrid grimaces he
had shown them before, without vouchsafing a word in reply.
Vathek, no longer able to brook such insolence, immediately
kicked him from the steps; instantly descending, repeated his
blow; and persisted, with such assiduity, as incited all who were
present to follow his example. Every foot was up and aimed
at the Indian, and no sooner had any one given him a kick, than
he felt himself constrained to reiterate the stroke.</p>

<p>The stranger afforded them no small entertainment; for,
being both short and plump, he collected himself into a ball,
and rolled on all sides at the blows of his assailants, who pressed
after him, wherever he turned, with an eagerness beyond conception,
whilst their numbers were every moment increasing.
The ball, indeed, in passing from one apartment to another,
drew every person after it that came in its way; insomuch
that the whole palace was thrown into confusion, and resounded
with a tremendous clamour. The women of the harem, amazed
at the uproar, flew to their blinds to discover the cause; but no
sooner did they catch a glimpse of the ball than, feeling themselves
unable to refrain, they broke from the clutches of their
eunuchs, who, to stop their flight, pinched them till they bled;
but in vain: whilst themselves, though trembling with terror
at the escape of their charge, were as incapable of resisting the
attraction.</p>

<p>After having traversed the halls, galleries, chambers, kitchens,
gardens, and stables of the palace, the Indian at last took his
course through the courts; whilst the caliph, pursuing him closer
than the rest, bestowed as many kicks as he possibly could;
yet not without receiving now and then a few which his competitors,
in their eagerness, designed for the ball.</p>

<p>Carathis, Morakanabad, and two or three old viziers, whose
wisdom had hitherto withstood the attraction, wishing to
prevent Vathek from exposing himself in the presence of his
subjects, fell down in his way to impede the pursuit: but he,
regardless of their obstruction, leaped over their heads, and went
on as before. They then ordered the muezzins to call the people
to prayers; both for the sake of getting them out of the way,
and of endeavouring, by their petitions, to avert the calamity:
but neither of these expedients was a whit more successful.
The sight of this fatal ball was alone sufficient to draw after
it every beholder. The muezzins themselves, though they saw
it but at a distance, hastened down from their minarets,<a href="#Note_207a" name="Note_20" id="Note_20" class="nanchor">*</a> and
mixed with the crowd; which continued to increase in so surprising
a manner that scarce an inhabitant was left in Samarah
except the aged; the sick, confined to their beds; and infants
at the breast, whose nurses could run more nimbly without
them. Even Carathis, Morakanabad, and the rest, were all
become of the party. The shrill screams of the females, who
had broken from their apartments and were unable to extricate
themselves from the pressure of the crowd, together with those
of the eunuchs jostling after them, and terrified lest their
charge should escape from their sight; the execrations of husbands,
urging forward and menacing each other; kicks given
and received; stumblings and overthrows at every step; in a
word, the confusion that universally prevailed, rendered Samarah
like a city taken by storm, and devoted to absolute plunder. At
last, the cursed Indian, who still preserved his rotundity of
figure, after passing through all the streets and public places,
and leaving them empty, rolled onwards to the plain of Catoul,
and entered the valley at the foot of the mountain of the
four fountains.</p>

<p>As a continual fall of water had excavated an immense gulf
in the valley, whose opposite side was closed in by a steep
acclivity, the caliph and his attendants were apprehensive lest
the ball should bound into the chasm, and, to prevent it,
redoubled their efforts, but in vain. The Indian persevered in
his onward direction; and, as had been apprehended, glancing
from the precipice with the rapidity of lightning, was lost in
the gulf below.</p>

<p>Vathek would have followed the perfidious Giaour, had not
an invisible agency arrested his progress. The multitude that
pressed after him were at once checked in the same manner,
and a calm instantaneously ensued. They all gazed at each
other with an air of astonishment; and notwithstanding that
the loss of veils and turbans, together with torn habits, and
dust blended with sweat, presented a most laughable spectacle,
yet there was not one smile to be seen. On the contrary, all
with looks of confusion and sadness returned in silence to
Samarah, and retired to their inmost apartments, without ever
reflecting, that they had been impelled by an invisible power
into the extravagance for which they reproached themselves;
for it is but just that men, who so often arrogate to their own merit
the good of which they are but instruments, should also
attribute to themselves absurdities which they could not prevent.</p>

<p>
The caliph was the only person who refused to leave the
valley. He commanded his tents to be pitched there, and
stationed himself on the very edge of the precipice, in spite of
the representations of Carathis and Morakanabad, who pointed
out the hazard of its brink giving way, and the vicinity to the
magician that had so cruelly tormented him. Vathek derided
all their remonstrances; and having ordered a thousand flambeaux
to be lighted, and directed his attendants to proceed in
lighting more, lay down on the slippery margin, and attempted,
by the help of this artificial splendour, to look through that
gloom, which all the fires of the empyrean had been insufficient
to pervade. One while he fancied to himself voices arising
from the depth of the gulf; at another, he seemed to distinguish
the accents of the Indian; but all was no more than the hollow
murmur of waters, and the din of the cataracts that rushed
from steep to steep down the sides of the mountain.</p>

<p>Having passed the night in this cruel perturbation, the caliph
at daybreak retired to his tent; where, without taking the
least sustenance, he continued to doze till the dusk of evening
began again to come on. He then resumed his vigils as before,
and persevered in observing them for many nights together.
At length, fatigued with so fruitless an employment, he sought
relief from change. To this end, he sometimes paced with
hasty strides across the plain; and as he wildly gazed at the
stars, reproached them with having deceived him; but, lo! on
a sudden, the clear blue sky appeared streaked over with
streams of blood, which reached from the valley even to the
city of Samarah. As this awful phenomenon seemed to touch
his tower, Vathek at first thought of repairing thither to view
it more distinctly; but, feeling himself unable to advance, and
being overcome with apprehension, he muffled up his face in
the folds of his robe.</p>

<p>Terrifying as these prodigies were, this impression upon him
was no more than momentary, and served only to stimulate
his love of the marvellous. Instead, therefore, of returning to
his palace, he persisted in the resolution of abiding where the
Indian had vanished from his view. One night, however, while
he was walking as usual on the plain, the moon and stars were
eclipsed at once, and a total darkness ensued. The earth
trembled beneath him, and a voice came forth, the voice of
the Giaour, who, in accents more sonorous than thunder, thus
addressed him: “Wouldest thou devote thyself to me? adore
the terrestrial influences, and abjure Mahomet? On these
conditions I will bring thee to the Palace of Subterranean Fire.
There shalt thou behold, in immense depositories, the treasures
which the stars have promised thee; and which will be conferred
by those Intelligences whom thou shalt thus render propitious.
It was from thence I brought my sabres, and it is there that
Soliman Ben Daoud<a href="#Note_210a" name="Note_21" id="Note_21" class="nanchor">*</a> reposes, surrounded by the talismans that
control the world.”</p>

<p>The astonished caliph trembled as he answered, yet he
answered in a style that showed him to be no novice in preternatural
adventures: “Where art thou? be present to my eyes;
dissipate the gloom that perplexes me, and of which I deem thee
the cause. After the many flambeaux I have burnt to discover
thee, thou mayest at least grant a glimpse of thy horrible
visage.”—“Abjure then Mahomet!” replied the Indian, “and
promise me full proofs of thy sincerity: otherwise, thou shalt
never behold me again.”</p>

<p>The unhappy caliph, instigated by insatiable curiosity,
lavished his promises in the utmost profusion. The sky immediately
brightened; and, by the light of the planets which
seemed almost to blaze, Vathek beheld the earth open; and,
at the extremity of a vast black chasm, a portal of ebony, before
which stood the Indian, holding in his hand a golden key
which he sounded against the lock.</p>

<p>“How,” cried Vathek, “can I descend to thee? Come, take
me, and instantly open the portal.”—“Not so fast,” replied the
Indian, “impatient caliph! Know that I am parched with
thirst, and cannot open this door, till my thirst be thoroughly
appeased; I require the blood of fifty children. Take them
from among the most beautiful sons of thy viziers<a href="#Note_210b" name="Note_22" id="Note_22" class="nanchor">*</a> and great
men; or neither can my thirst nor thy curiosity be satisfied.
Return to Samarah; procure for me this necessary libation;
come back hither; throw it thyself into this chasm, and then
shalt thou see!”</p>

<p>Having thus spoken, the Indian turned his back on the caliph,
who, incited by the suggestions of demons, resolved on the
direful sacrifice. He now pretended to have regained his tranquillity,
and set out for Samarah amidst the acclamations of a
people who still loved him, and forbore not to rejoice when
they believed him to have recovered his reason. So successfully
did he conceal the emotion of his heart, that even Carathis and
Morakanabad were equally deceived with the rest. Nothing
was heard of but festivals and rejoicings. The fatal ball, which
no tongue had hitherto ventured to mention, was brought on
the tapis. A general laugh went round, though many, still
smarting under the hands of the surgeon from the hurts received
in that memorable adventure, had no great reason for mirth.</p>

<p>The prevalence of this gay humour was not a little grateful
to Vathek, who perceived how much it conduced to his project.
He put on the appearance of affability to every one; but
especially to his viziers and the grandees of his court, whom he
failed not to regale with a sumptuous banquet; during which
he insensibly directed the conversation to the children of his
guests. Having asked, with a good-natured air, which of them
were blessed with the handsomest boys, every father at once
asserted the pretensions of his own; and the contest imperceptibly
grew so warm, that nothing could have withholden
them from coming to blows but their profound reverence for
the person of the caliph. Under the pretence, therefore, of
reconciling the disputants, Vathek took upon him to decide;
and, with this view, commanded the boys to be brought.</p>

<p>It was not long before a troop of these poor children made
their appearance, all equipped by their fond mothers with
such ornaments as might give the greatest relief to their beauty,
or most advantageously display the graces of their age. But,
whilst this brilliant assemblage attracted the eyes and hearts
of every one besides, the caliph scrutinized each, in his turn,
with a malignant avidity that passed for attention, and selected
from their number the fifty whom he judged the Giaour would
prefer.</p>

<p>With an equal show of kindness as before, he proposed to
celebrate a festival on the plain, for the entertainment of his
young favourites, who, he said, ought to rejoice still more than
all at the restoration of his health, on account of the favours
he intended for them.</p>

<p>The caliph’s proposal was received with the greatest delight,
and soon published through Samarah. Litters, camels, and
horses were prepared. Women and children, old men and
young, every one placed himself as he chose. The cavalcade
set forward, attended by all the confectioners in the city and
its precincts; the populace, following on foot, composed an
amazing crowd, and occasioned no little noise. All was joy; nor
did any one call to mind what most of them had suffered when
they lately travelled the road they were now passing so gaily.</p>

<p>The evening was serene, the air refreshing, the sky clear, and
the flowers exhaled their fragrance. The beams of the declining
sun, whose mild splendour reposed on the summit of the
mountain, shed a glow of ruddy light over its green declivity, and
the white flocks sporting upon it. No sounds were heard, save
the murmurs of the four fountains, and the reeds and voices of
shepherds, calling to each other from different eminences.</p>

<p>The lovely innocents, destined for the sacrifice, added not a
little to the hilarity of the scene. They approached the plain
full of sportiveness, some coursing butterflies, others culling
flowers, or picking up the shining little pebbles that attracted
their notice. At intervals they nimbly started from each
other for the sake of being caught again and mutually imparting
a thousand caresses.</p>

<p>The dreadful chasm, at whose bottom the portal of ebony
was placed, began to appear at a distance. It looked like a
black streak that divided the plain. Morakanabad and his
companions took it for some work which the caliph had ordered.
Unhappy men! little did they surmise for what it was destined.
Vathek, unwilling that they should examine it too nearly,
stopped the procession, and ordered a spacious circle to be
formed on this side, at some distance from the accursed chasm.
The body-guard of eunuchs was detached, to measure out the
lists intended for the games, and prepare the rings for the
arrows of the young archers. The fifty competitors were soon
stripped, and presented to the admiration of the spectators
the suppleness and grace of their delicate limbs. Their eyes
sparkled with a joy, which those of their fond parents reflected.
Every one offered wishes for the little candidate nearest his
heart, and doubted not of his being victorious. A breathless
suspense awaited the contests of these amiable and innocent
victims.</p>

<p>The caliph, availing himself of the first moment to retire
from the crowd, advanced towards the chasm; and there heard,
yet not without shuddering, the voice of the Indian; who,
gnashing his teeth, eagerly demanded, “Where are they?—where
are they?—perceivest thou not how my mouth waters?”—“Relentless
Giaour!” answerd Vathek, with emotion; “can
nothing content thee but the massacre of these lovely victims?
Ah! wert thou to behold their beauty, it must certainly move
thy compassion.”—“Perdition on thy compassion, babbler!”
cried the Indian: “give them me; instantly give them, or my
portal shall be closed against thee for ever!”—“Not so loudly,”
replied the caliph, blushing.—“I understand thee,” returned
the Giaour with the grin of an ogre; “thou wantest no presence
of mind: I will for a moment forbear.”</p>

<p>
During this exquisite dialogue, the games went forward with
all alacrity, and at length concluded, just as the twilight began
to overcast the mountains. Vathek, who was still standing on
the edge of the chasm, called out, with all his might, “Let my
fifty little favourites approach me, separately; and let them
come in the order of their success. To the first, I will give my
diamond bracelet;<a href="#Note_213a" name="Note_23" id="Note_23" class="nanchor">*</a> to the second, my collar of emeralds; to the
third, my aigret of rubies; to the fourth, my girdle of topazes;
and to the rest, each a part of my dress, even down to my
slippers.”</p>

<p>This declaration was received with reiterated acclamations;
and all extolled the liberality of a prince who would thus strip
himself for the amusement of his subjects and the encouragement
of the rising generation. The caliph in the meanwhile,
undressed himself by degrees, and, raising his arm as high as he
was able, made each of the prizes glitter in the air; but whilst
he delivered it with one hand to the child who sprung forward
to receive it, he with the other pushed the poor innocent into
the gulf, where the Giaour, with a sullen muttering, incessantly
repeated, “More! more!”</p>

<p>This dreadful device was executed with so much dexterity,
that the boy who was approaching him remained unconscious
of the fate of his forerunner; and, as to the spectators, the
shades of evening, together with their distance, precluded them
from perceiving any object distinctly. Vathek, having in this
manner thrown in the last of the fifty, and, expecting that the
Giaour, on receiving him, would have presented the key, already
fancied himself as great as Soliman, and consequently above
being amenable for what he had done; when, to his utter
amazement, the chasm closed, and the ground became as entire
as the rest of the plain.</p>

<p>No language could express his rage and despair. He execrated
the perfidy of the Indian; loaded him with the most infamous
invectives; and stamped with his foot, as resolving to be heard.
He persisted in this till his strength failed him, and then fell on
the earth like one void of sense. His viziers and grandees, who
were nearer than the rest, supposed him at first to be sitting
on the grass, at play with their amiable children; but at length,
prompted by doubt, they advanced towards the spot, and
found the caliph alone, who wildly demanded what they
wanted? “Our children! our children!” cried they. “It is
assuredly pleasant,” said he, “to make me accountable for
accidents. Your children, while at play, fell from the precipice,
and I should have experienced their fate, had I not suddenly
started back.”</p>

<p>At these words, the fathers of the fifty boys cried out aloud;
the mothers repeated their exclamations an octave higher;
whilst the rest, without knowing the cause, soon drowned the
voices of both with still louder lamentations of their own.
“Our caliph,” said they, and the report soon circulated, “our
caliph has played us this trick, to gratify his accursed Giaour.
Let us punish him for perfidy! let us avenge ourselves! let us
avenge the blood of the innocent! let us throw this cruel prince
into the gulf that is near, and let his name be mentioned no
more!”</p>

<p>At this rumour and these menaces, Carathis, full of consternation,
hastened to Morakanabad, and said: “Vizier, you
have lost two beautiful boys, and must necessarily be the most
afflicted of fathers; but you are virtuous, save your master.”—“I
will brave every hazard,” replied the vizier, “to rescue
him from his present danger, but afterwards will abandon him
to his fate. Bababalouk,” continued he, “put yourself at
the head of your eunuchs: disperse the mob, and, if possible,
bring back this unhappy prince to his palace.” Bababalouk
and his fraternity, felicitating each other in a low voice on their
having been spared the cares as well as the honour of paternity,
obeyed the mandate of the vizier; who, seconding their exertions
to the utmost of his power, at length accomplished his generous
enterprise; and retired, as he resolved, to lament at his leisure.</p>

<p>No sooner had the caliph re-entered his palace than Carathis
commanded the doors to be fastened; but perceiving the tumult
to be still violent, and hearing the imprecations which resounded
from all quarters, she said to her son, “Whether the populace
be right or wrong, it behoves you to provide for your safety;
let us retire to your own apartment, and from thence through
the subterranean passage, known only to ourselves, into your
tower: there, with the assistance of the mutes<a href="#Note_214a" name="Note_24" id="Note_24" class="nanchor">*</a> who never leave
it, we may be able to make a powerful resistance. Bababalouk,
supposing us to be still in the palace, will guard its avenues
for his own sake; and we shall soon find, without the counsels
of that blubberer Morakanabad, what expedient may be the
best to adopt.”</p>

<p>Vathek, without making the least reply, acquiesced in his
mother’s proposal, and repeated as he went, “Nefarious
Giaour! where art thou? hast thou not yet devoured those poor
children? where are thy sabres? thy golden key? thy talismans?”
Carathis, who guessed from these interrogations a
part of the truth, had no difficulty to apprehend in getting at
the whole as soon as he should be a little composed in his tower.
This princess was so far from being influenced by scruples,
that she was as wicked as woman could be, which is not saying
a little; for the sex pique themselves on their superiority in
every competition. The recital of the caliph, therefore,
occasioned neither terror nor surprise to his mother: she felt
no emotion but from the promises of the Giaour, and said to
her son, “This Giaour, it must be confessed, is somewhat
sanguinary in his taste; but the terrestrial powers are always
terrible; nevertheless, what the one hath promised, and the
others can confer, will prove a sufficient indemnification. No
crimes should be thought too dear for such a reward: forbear,
then, to revile the Indian; you have not fulfilled the conditions
to which his services are annexed: for instance, is not a sacrifice
to the subterranean Genii required? and should we not be prepared
to offer it as soon as the tumult is subsided? This charge
I will take on myself, and have no doubt of succeeding, by means
of your treasures, which, as there are now so many others in
store, may without fear be exhausted.” Accordingly, the
princess, who possessed the most consummate skill in the art
of persuasion, went immediately back through the subterranean
passage; and, presenting herself to the populace from a window
of the palace, began to harangue them with all the address of
which she was mistress; whilst Bababalouk showered money
from both hands amongst the crowd, who by these united means
were soon appeased. Every person retired to his home, and
Carathis returned to the tower.</p>

<p>Prayer at break of day was announced,<a href="#Note_215a" name="Note_25" id="Note_25" class="nanchor">*</a> when Carathis and
Vathek ascended the steps which led to the summit of the
tower, where they remained for some time, though the weather
was lowering and wet. This impending gloom corresponded
with their malignant dispositions; but when the sun began to
break through the clouds, they ordered a pavilion to be raised,
as a screen against the intrusion of his beams. The caliph,
overcome with fatigue, sought refreshment from repose, at the
same time hoping that significant dreams might attend on his
slumbers; whilst the indefatigable Carathis, followed by a party
of her mutes, descended to prepare whatever she judged proper
for the oblation of the approaching night.</p>

<p>By secret stairs, contrived within the thickness of the wall,
and known only to herself and her son, she first repaired to the
mysterious recesses in which were deposited the mummies that
had been wrested from the catacombs of the ancient Pharaohs.
Of these she ordered several to be taken. From thence she
resorted to a gallery where, under the guard of fifty female
negroes, mute, and blind of the right eye, were preserved the
oil of the most venomous serpents, rhinoceros’ horns, and woods
of a subtile and penetrating odour procured from the interior
of the Indies, together with a thousand other horrible rarities.
This collection had been formed for a purpose like the present,
by Carathis herself, from a presentiment that she might one
day enjoy some intercourse with the infernal powers, to whom
she had ever been passionately attached, and to whose taste
she was no stranger.</p>

<p>To familiarize herself the better with the horrors in view,
the princess remained in the company of her negresses, who
squinted in the most amiable manner from the only eye they
had, and leered, with exquisite delight, at the skulls and skeletons<a href="#Note_216a" name="Note_26" id="Note_26" class="nanchor">*</a>
which Carathis had drawn forth from her cabinets; all
of them making the most frightful contortions, and uttering
such shrill chatterings, that the princess, stunned by them and
suffocated by the potency of the exhalations, was forced to quit
the gallery, after stripping it of a part of its abominable treasures.</p>

<p>Whilst she was thus occupied, the caliph, who, instead of
the visions he expected, had acquired in these unsubstantial
regions a voracious appetite, was greatly provoked at the mutes.
For having totally forgotten their deafness, he had impatiently
asked them for food; and seeing them regardless of his demand,
he began to cuff, pinch, and bite them, till Carathis arrived to
terminate a scene so indecent, to the great content of these
miserable creatures. “Son! what means all this?” said she,
panting for breath. “I thought I heard as I came up the
shrieks of a thousand bats, torn from their crannies in the
recesses of a cavern; and it was the outcry only of these poor
mutes, whom you were so unmercifully abusing. In truth,
you but ill deserve the admirable provision I have brought you.”—“Give
it me instantly,” exclaimed the caliph; “I am perishing
for hunger!”—“As to that,” answered she, “you must
have an excellent stomach if it can digest what I have brought.”—“Be
quick,” replied the caliph;—“but, oh heavens! what
horrors! what do you intend?”—“Come, come,” returned
Carathis, “be not so squeamish; but help me to arrange everything
properly; and you shall see that what you reject with
such symptoms of disgust will soon complete your felicity. Let
us get ready the pile for the sacrifice of to-night; and think not
of eating till that is performed: know you not, that all solemn
rites ought to be preceded by a rigorous abstinence?”</p>

<p>The caliph, not daring to object, abandoned himself to grief
and the wind that ravaged his entrails, whilst his mother went
forward with the requisite operations. Phials of serpents’ oil,
mummies, and bones, were soon set in order on the balustrade
of the tower. The pile began to rise, and in three hours was
twenty cubits high. At length darkness approached, and
Carathis, having stripped herself to her inmost garment, clapped
her hands in an impulse of ecstasy; the mutes followed her
example; but Vathek, extenuated with hunger and impatience,
was unable to support himself, and fell down in a swoon. The
sparks had already kindled the dry wood; the venomous oil
burst into a thousand blue flames; the mummies, dissolving,
emitted a thick dun vapour; and the rhinoceros’ horns, beginning
to consume, all together diffused such a stench, that the
caliph, recovering, started from his trance, and gazed wildly
on the scene in full blaze around him. The oil gushed forth
in a plenitude of streams; and the negresses, who supplied it
without intermission, united their cries to those of the princess.
At last the fire became so violent, and the flames reflected from
the polished marble so dazzling, that the caliph, unable to
withstand the heat and the blaze, effected his escape, and took
shelter under the imperial standard.</p>

<p>In the meantime, the inhabitants of Samarah, scared at the
light which shone over the city, arose in haste, ascended their
roofs, beheld the tower on fire, and hurried, half naked, to the
square. Their love for their sovereign immediately awoke;
and, apprehending him in danger of perishing in his tower,
their whole thoughts were occupied with the means of his safety.
Morakanabad flew from his retirement, wiped away his tears,
and cried out for water like the rest. Bababalouk, whose
olfactory nerves were more familiarized to magical odours,
readily conjecturing that Carathis was engaged in her favourite
amusements, strenuously exhorted them not to be alarmed.
Him, however, they treated as an old poltroon, and styled him
a rascally traitor. The camels and dromedaries were advancing
with water; but no one knew by which way to enter the tower.
Whilst the populace was obstinate in forcing the doors, a
violent north-east wind drove an immense volume of flame
against them. At first they recoiled, but soon came back with
redoubled zeal. At the same time, the stench of the horns
and mummies increasing, most of the crowd fell backwards in
a state of suffocation. Those that kept their feet mutually
wondered at the cause of the smell, and admonished each other
to retire. Morakanabad, more sick than the rest, remained in
a piteous condition. Holding his nose with one hand, every
one persisted in his efforts with the other to burst open the
doors and obtain admission. A hundred and forty of the
strongest and most resolute at length accomplished their purpose.
Having gained the staircase, by their violent exertions,
they attained a great height in a quarter of an hour.</p>

<p>Carathis, alarmed at the signs of her mutes, advanced to the
staircase, went down a few steps, and heard several voices calling
out from below, “You shall in a moment have water!” Being
rather alert, considering her age, she presently regained the top
of the tower, and bade her son suspend the sacrifice for some
minutes; adding, “We shall soon be enabled to render it more
grateful. Certain dolts of your subjects, imagining, no doubt,
that we were on fire, have been rash enough to break through
those doors which had hitherto remained inviolate, for the sake
of bringing up water. They are very kind, you must allow, so
soon to forget the wrongs you have done them; but that is of
little moment. Let us offer them to the Giaour; let them come
up; our mutes, who neither want strength nor experience, will
soon dispatch them, exhausted as they are with fatigue.”—“Be
it so,” answered the caliph, “provided we finish, and I
dine.” In fact, these good people, out of breath from ascending
fifteen hundred stairs in such haste, and chagrined at having
spilt by the way the water they had taken, were no sooner
arrived at the top, than the blaze of the flames and the fumes
of the mummies at once overpowered their senses. It was a
pity! for they beheld not the agreeable smile with which the
mutes and negresses adjusted the cord to their necks: these
amiable personages rejoiced, however, no less at the scene.
Never before had the ceremony of strangling been performed
with so much facility. They all fell, without the least resistance
or struggle: so that Vathek, in the space of a few moments,
found himself surrounded by the dead bodies of the most
faithful of his subjects; all which were thrown on the top of the
pile. Carathis, whose presence of mind never forsook her,
perceiving that she had carcasses sufficient to complete her
oblation, commanded the chains to be stretched across the
staircase, and the iron doors barricadoed, that no more might
come up.</p>

<p>
No sooner were these orders obeyed, than the tower shook;
the dead bodies vanished in the flames, which at once changed
from a swarthy crimson to a bright rose colour; an ambient
vapour emitted the most exquisite fragrance; the marble
columns rang with harmonious sounds, and the liquefied horns
diffused a delicious perfume. Carathis, in transports, anticipated
the success of her enterprise; whilst her mutes and
negresses, to whom these sweets had given the colic, retired
grumbling to their cells.</p>

<p>Scarcely were they gone, when, instead of the pile, horns,
mummies, and ashes, the caliph both saw and felt, with a
degree of pleasure which he could not express, a table covered
with the most magnificent repast: flagons of wine and vases
of exquisite sherbet reposing on snow.<a href="#Note_219a" name="Note_27" id="Note_27" class="nanchor">*</a> He availed himself,
without scruple, of such an entertainment; and had already
laid hands on a lamb stuffed with pistachios, whilst Carathis
was privately drawing from a filigree urn a parchment<a href="#Note_219b" name="Note_28" id="Note_28" class="nanchor">*</a> that
seemed to be endless, and which had escaped the notice of her
son. Totally occupied in gratifying an importunate appetite,
he left her to peruse it without interruption; which having
finished, she said to him, in an authoritative tone, “Put an
end to your gluttony, and hear the splendid promises with
which you are favoured!” She then read as follows: “Vathek,
my well-beloved, thou hast surpassed my hopes: my nostrils
have been regaled by the savour of thy mummies, thy horns,
and, still more, by the lives devoted on the pile. At the full
of the moon, cause the bands of thy musicians, and thy timbals,
to be heard; depart from thy palace, surrounded by all the
pageants of majesty—thy most faithful slaves, thy best beloved
wives, thy most magnificent litters, thy richest loaden camels—and
set forward on thy way to Istakhar.<a href="#Note_219c" name="Note_29" id="Note_29" class="nanchor">*</a> There I await thy
coming: that is the region of wonders: there shalt thou receive
the diadem of Gian Ben Gian,<a href="#Note_219d" name="Note_30" id="Note_30" class="nanchor">*</a> the talismans of Soliman,<a href="#Note_219e" name="Note_31" id="Note_31" class="nanchor">*</a> and
the treasures of the pre-Adamite sultans:<a href="#Note_219f" name="Note_32" id="Note_32" class="nanchor">*</a> there shalt thou be
solaced with all kinds of delight.—But beware how thou enterest
any dwelling<a href="#Note_219g" name="Note_33" id="Note_33" class="nanchor">*</a> on thy route; or thou shalt feel the effects of
my anger.”</p>

<p>The caliph, notwithstanding his habitual luxury, had never
before dined with so much satisfaction. He gave full scope to
the joy of these golden tidings, and betook himself to drinking
anew. Carathis, whose antipathy to wine was by no means
insuperable, failed not to pledge him at every bumper he
ironically quaffed to the health of Mahomet. This infernal
liquor completed their impious temerity, and prompted them
to utter a profusion of blasphemies. They gave a loose to
their wit, at the expense of the ass of Balaam, the dog of the
seven sleepers, and the other animals admitted into the paradise
of Mahomet.<a href="#Note_220a" name="Note_34" id="Note_34" class="nanchor">*</a> In this sprightly humour, they descended the
fifteen hundred stairs, diverting themselves, as they went, at
the anxious faces they saw on the square, through the barbacans
and loopholes of the tower; and at length arrived at the royal
apartments, by the subterranean passage. Bababalouk was
parading to and fro, and issuing his mandates with great pomp
to the eunuchs, who were snuffing the lights and painting the
eyes of the Circassians. No sooner did he catch sight of the
caliph and his mother, than he exclaimed, “Hah! you have
then, I perceive, escaped from the flames; I was not, however,
altogether out of doubt.”—“Of what moment is it to us what
you thought or think?” cried Carathis: “go, speed, tell Morakanabad
that we immediately want him; and take care not to
stop by the way to make your insipid reflections.”</p>

<p>Morakanabad delayed not to obey the summons, and was
received by Vathek and his mother with great solemnity.
They told him, with an air of composure and commiseration,
that the fire at the top of the tower was extinguished; but
that it had cost the lives of the brave people who sought to
assist them.</p>

<p>“Still more misfortunes!” cried Morakanabad, with a sigh.
“Ah, commander of the faithful, our holy Prophet is certainly
irritated against us! it behoves you to appease him.” “We
will appease him hereafter,” replied the caliph, with a smile
that augured nothing of good. “You will have leisure sufficient
for your supplications during my absence, for this country is
the bane of my health. I am disgusted with the mountain of
the four fountains, and am resolved to go and drink of the
stream of Rocnabad.<a href="#Note_220b" name="Note_35" id="Note_35" class="nanchor">*</a> I long to refresh myself in the delightful
valleys which it waters. Do you, with the advice of my mother,
govern<a href="#Note_220c" name="Note_36" id="Note_36" class="nanchor">*</a> my dominions, and take care to supply whatever her
experiments may demand; for you well know that our tower
abounds in materials for the advancement of science.”</p>

<p>The tower but ill suited Morakanabad’s taste. Immense
treasures had been lavished upon it; and nothing had he ever
seen carried thither but female negroes, mutes, and abominable
drugs. Nor did he know well what to think of Carathis, who,
like a chameleon, could assume all possible colours. Her
cursed eloquence had often driven the poor Mussulman to his
last shifts. He considered, however, that if she possessed but
few good qualities, her son had still fewer; and that the alternative,
on the whole, would be in her favour. Consoled, therefore,
with this reflection, he went, in good spirits, to soothe the
populace, and make the proper arrangements for his master’s
journey.</p>

<p>Vathek, to conciliate the spirits of the subterranean palace,
resolved that his expedition should be uncommonly splendid.
With this view he confiscated, on all sides, the property of his
subjects; whilst his worthy mother stripped the seraglios she
visited of the gems they contained. She collected all the
sempstresses and embroiderers of Samarah and other cities, to
the distance of sixty leagues, to prepare pavilions, palanquins,
sofas, canopies, and litters for the train of the monarch. There
was not left, in Masulipatan, a single piece of chintz; and so
much muslin<a href="#Note_221a" name="Note_37" id="Note_37" class="nanchor">*</a> had been brought up to dress out Bababalouk
and the other black eunuchs, that there remained not an ell
of it in the whole Irak of Babylon.</p>

<p>During these preparations, Carathis, who never lost sight of
her great object, which was to obtain favour with the powers
of darkness, made select parties of the fairest and most delicate
ladies of the city; but in the midst of their gaiety, she contrived
to introduce vipers amongst them, and to break pots of scorpions
under the table. They all bit to a wonder; and Carathis would
have left her friends to die, were it not that, to fill up the time,
she now and then amused herself in curing their wounds, with
an excellent anodyne of her own invention; for this good princess
abhorred being indolent.</p>

<p>Vathek, who was not altogether so active as his mother,
devoted his time to the sole gratification of his senses, in the
palaces which were severally dedicated to them. He disgusted
himself no more with the divan, or the mosque. One half of
Samarah followed his example, whilst the other lamented the
progress of corruption.</p>

<p>In the midst of these transactions, the embassy returned,
which had been sent, in pious times, to Mecca. It consisted
of the most reverend mullahs,<a href="#Note_221b" name="Note_38" id="Note_38" class="nanchor">*</a> who had fulfilled their commission
and brought back one of those precious besoms which
are used to sweep the sacred Caaba;<a href="#Note_221c" name="Note_39" id="Note_39" class="nanchor">*</a> a present truly worthy
of the greatest potentate on earth!</p>

<p>The caliph happened at this instant to be engaged in an
apartment by no means adapted to the reception of embassies.
He heard the voice of Bababalouk, calling out from between the
door and the tapestry that hung before it, “Here are the
excellent Edris al Shafei, and the seraphic Al Mouhateddin, who
have brought the besom from Mecca, and, with tears of joy,
entreat they may present it to your majesty in person.”—“Let
them bring the besom hither; it may be of use,” said Vathek.—“How!”
answered Bababalouk, half aloud and amazed.—“Obey,”
replied the caliph, “for it is my sovereign will; go
instantly, vanish! for here will I receive the good folk who have
thus filled thee with joy.”</p>

<p>The eunuch departed muttering, and bade the venerable
train attend him. A sacred rapture was diffused amongst these
reverend old men. Though fatigued with the length of their
expedition, they followed Bababalouk with an alertness almost
miraculous, and felt themselves highly flattered, as they swept
along the stately porticoes, that the caliph would not receive
them like ambassadors in ordinary in his hall of audience.
Soon reaching the interior of the harem (where, through blinds
of Persian, they perceived large soft eyes, dark and blue, that
came and went like lightning), penetrated with respect and
wonder, and full of their celestial mission, they advanced
in procession towards the small corridors that appeared to
terminate in nothing, but, nevertheless, led to the cell where
the caliph expected their coming.</p>

<p>“What! is the commander of the faithful sick?” said Edris
al Shafei in a low voice to his companion.—“I rather think
he is in his oratory,” answered Al Mouhateddin. Vathek, who
heard the dialogue, cried out, “What imports it you, how I
am employed? approach without delay.” They advanced,
whilst the caliph, without showing himself, put forth his hand
from behind the tapestry that hung before the door, and
demanded of them the besom. Having prostrated themselves
as well as the corridor would permit, and even in a tolerable
semicircle, the venerable Al Shafei, drawing forth the besom
from the embroidered and perfumed scarves in which it had
been enveloped and secured from the profane gaze of vulgar
eyes, arose from his associates, and advanced, with an air of
the most awful solemnity, towards the supposed oratory;<a href="#Note_222a" name="Note_40" id="Note_40" class="nanchor">*</a> but
with what astonishment! with what horror was he seized!
Vathek, bursting out into a villainous laugh, snatched the
besom from his trembling hand, and, fixing upon some cobwebs,
that hung from the ceiling, gravely brushed them away till not
a single one remained. The old men, overpowered with amazement,
were unable to lift their beards from the ground; for, as
Vathek had carelessly left the tapestry between them half
drawn, they were witnesses of the whole transaction. Their
tears bedewed the marble. Al Mouhateddin swooned through
mortification and fatigue, whilst the caliph, throwing himself
backward on his seat, shouted and clapped his hands without
mercy. At last, addressing himself to Bababalouk, “My dear
black,” said he, “go, regale these pious poor souls with my good
wine from Schiraz,<a href="#Note_223a" name="Note_41" id="Note_41" class="nanchor">*</a> since they can boast of having seen more of
my palace than any one besides.” Having said this, he threw
the besom in their face, and went to enjoy the laugh with
Carathis. Bababalouk did all in his power to console the
ambassadors; but the two most infirm expired on the spot:
the rest were carried to their beds, from whence, being heart-broken
with sorrow and shame, they never arose.</p>

<p>The succeeding night, Vathek, attended by his mother,
ascended the tower to see if everything were ready for his
journey; for he had great faith in the influence of the stars.
The planets appeared in their most favourable aspects. The
caliph, to enjoy so flattering a sight, supped gaily on the roof;
and fancied that he heard, during his repast, loud shouts of
laughter resound through the sky, in a manner that inspired the
fullest assurance.</p>

<p>All was in motion at the palace; lights were kept burning
through the whole of the night: the sound of implements, and
of artisans finishing their work; the voices of women, and their
guardians, who sung at their embroidery; all conspired to interrupt
the stillness of nature, and infinitely delighted the heart of
Vathek, who imagined himself going in triumph to sit upon the
throne of Soliman. The people were not less satisfied than
himself: all assisted to accelerate the moment which should
rescue them from the wayward caprices of so extravagant a
master.</p>

<p>The day preceding the departure of this infatuated prince
was employed by Carathis in repeating to him the decrees of
the mysterious parchment, which she had thoroughly gotten
by heart; and in recommending him not to enter the habitation
of any one by the way:—“For well thou knowest,” added she,
“how liquorish thy taste is after good dishes and young damsels:
let me, therefore, enjoin thee to be content with thy old cooks,
who are the best in the world; and not to forget that, in thy
ambulatory seraglio, there are at least three dozen of pretty
faces which Bababalouk has not yet unveiled. I myself
have a great desire to watch over thy conduct, and visit the
subterranean palace, which, no doubt, contains whatever can
interest persons like us. There is nothing so pleasing as retiring
to caverns: my taste for dead bodies, and everything like
mummy, is decided; and, I am confident, thou wilt see the most
exquisite of their kind. Forget me not then, but the moment
thou art in possession of the talismans which are to open the
way to the mineral kingdoms and the centre of the earth itself,
fail not to dispatch some trusty genius to take me and my
cabinet; for the oil of the serpents I have pinched to death will
be a pretty present to the Giaour, who cannot but be charmed
with such dainties.”</p>

<p>Scarcely had Carathis ended this edifying discourse, when
the sun, setting behind the mountain of the four fountains, gave
place to the rising moon. This planet, being that evening at
full, appeared of unusual beauty and magnitude in the eyes of
the women, the eunuchs, and the pages, who were all impatient
to set forward. The city re-echoed with shouts of joy and
flourishing of trumpets. Nothing was visible but plumes
nodding on pavilions, and aigrets shining in the mild lustre
of the moon. The spacious square resembled an immense
parterre variegated with the most stately tulips of the East.<a href="#Note_224a" name="Note_42" id="Note_42" class="nanchor">*</a></p>

<p>Arrayed in the robes which were only worn at the most
distinguished ceremonials, and supported by his vizier and
Bababalouk, the caliph descended the great staircase of the
tower in the sight of all his people. He could not forbear
pausing, at intervals, to admire the superb appearance which
everywhere courted his view; whilst the whole multitude,
even to the camels with their sumptuous burdens, knelt down
before him. For some time a general stillness prevailed, which
nothing happened to disturb but the shrill screams of some
eunuchs in the rear. These vigilant guards, having remarked
certain cages of the ladies<a href="#Note_224b" name="Note_43" id="Note_43" class="nanchor">*</a> swagging somewhat awry, and discovered
that a few adventurous gallants had contrived to get
in, soon dislodged<a href="#Note_224c" name="Note_44" id="Note_44" class="nanchor">*</a> the enraptured culprits, and consigned them,
with good commendations, to the surgeons of the serail. The
majesty of so magnificent a spectacle was not, however, violated
by incidents like these. Vathek, meanwhile, saluted the moon
with an idolatrous air, that neither pleased Morakanabad, nor
the doctors of the law, any more than the viziers and grandees
of his court, who were all assembled to enjoy the last view of
their sovereign.</p>

<p>At length, the clarions and trumpets from the top of the
tower announced the prelude of departure. Though the
instruments were in unison with each other, yet a singular
dissonance was blended with their sounds. This proceeded
from Carathis, who was singing her direful orisons to the Giaour,
whilst the negresses and mutes supplied thorough-bass, without
articulating a word. The good Mussulmans fancied that they
heard the sullen hum of those nocturnal insects which presage
evil,<a href="#Note_225a" name="Note_45" id="Note_45" class="nanchor">*</a> and importuned Vathek to beware how he ventured his
sacred person.</p>

<p>On a given signal, the great standard of the Califat was
displayed: twenty thousand lances shone around it; and the
caliph, treading royally on the cloth of gold which had been
spread for his feet, ascended his litter amidst the general
acclamations of his subjects.</p>

<p>The expedition commenced with the utmost order, and so
entire a silence, that even the locusts were heard from the
thickets on the plain of Catoul.<a href="#Note_225b" name="Note_46" id="Note_46" class="nanchor">*</a> Gaiety and good humour
prevailing, they made full six leagues before the dawn; and
the morning star was still glittering in the firmament, when
the whole of this numerous train had halted on the banks of
the Tigris, where they encamped to repose for the rest of the day.</p>

<p>The three days that followed were spent in the same manner;
but on the fourth the heavens looked angry: lightnings broke
forth in frequent flashes; re-echoing peals of thunder succeeded;
and the trembling Circassians clung with all their might to
their ugly guardians. The caliph himself was greatly inclined
to take shelter in the large town of Ghulchissar, the governor
of which came forth to meet him, and tendered every kind of
refreshment the place could supply. But, having examined his
tablets, he suffered the rain to soak him almost to the bone,
notwithstanding the importunity of his first favourites. Though
he began to regret the palace of the senses, yet he lost not
sight of his enterprise, and his sanguine expectation confirmed
his resolution. His geographers were ordered to attend him;
but the weather proved so terrible that these poor people
exhibited a lamentable appearance: and their maps of the
different countries, spoiled by the rain, were in a still worse
plight than themselves. As no long journey had been undertaken
since the time of Haroun al Raschid, every one was
ignorant which way to turn; and Vathek, though well versed
in the course of the heavens, no longer knew his situation on
earth. He thundered even louder than the elements; and
muttered forth certain hints of the bow-string, which were not
very soothing to literary ears. Disgusted at the toilsome
weariness of the way, he determined to cross over the craggy
heights and follow the guidance of a peasant, who undertook to
bring him in four days to Rocnabad. Remonstrances were all
to no purpose: his resolution was fixed.</p>

<p>The females and eunuchs uttered shrill wailings at the sight
of the precipices below them, and the dreary prospects that
opened in the vast gorges of the mountains. Before they
could reach the ascent of the steepest rock, night overtook
them, and a boisterous tempest arose, which, having rent the
awnings of the palanquins and cages, exposed to the raw gusts
the poor ladies within, who had never before felt so piercing a
cold. The dark clouds that overcast the face of the sky
deepened the horrors of this disastrous night, insomuch that
nothing could be heard distinctly but the mewling of pages
and lamentations of sultanas.</p>

<p>To increase the general misfortune, the frightful uproar of
wild beasts resounded at a distance; and there were soon perceived
in the forest they were skirting the glaring of eyes, which
could belong only to devils or tigers. The pioneers, who, as
well as they could, had marked out a track, and a part of the
advanced guard, were devoured before they had been in the
least apprised of their danger. The confusion that prevailed
was extreme. Wolves, tigers, and other carnivorous animals,
invited by the howling of their companions, flocked together
from every quarter. The crashing of bones was heard on all
sides, and a fearful rush of wings overhead; for now vultures
also began to be of the party.</p>

<p>The terror at length reached the main body of the troops
which surrounded the monarch and his harem at the distance
of two leagues from the scene. Vathek (voluptuously reposed
in his capacious litter upon cushions of silk, with two little
pages<a href="#Note_226a" name="Note_47" id="Note_47" class="nanchor">*</a> beside him of complexions more fair than the enamel
of Franguestan, who were occupied in keeping off flies) was
soundly asleep, and contemplating in his dreams the treasures
of Soliman. The shrieks, however, of his wives awoke him
with a start; and, instead of the Giaour with his key of gold,
he beheld Bababalouk full of consternation. “Sire,” exclaimed
this good servant of the most potent of monarchs, “misfortune
is arrived at its height; wild beasts, who entertain no more
reverence for your sacred person than for a dead ass, have beset
your camels and their drivers; thirty of the most richly laden
are already become their prey, as well as your confectioners,
your cooks,<a href="#Note_226b" name="Note_48" id="Note_48" class="nanchor">*</a> and purveyors; and unless our holy Prophet should
protect us, we shall have all eaten our last meal.” At the
mention of eating, the caliph lost all patience. He began to
bellow, and even beat himself (for there was no seeing in the
dark). The rumour every instant increased; and Bababalouk,
finding no good could be done with his master, stopped both
his ears against the hurlyburly of the harem, and called out
aloud, “Come, ladies and brothers! all hands to work: strike
light in a moment! never shall it be said, that the commander
of the faithful served to regale these infidel brutes.” Though
there wanted not, in this bevy of beauties, a sufficient number
of capricious and wayward, yet, on the present occasion, they
were all compliance. Fires were visible, in a twinkling, in all
their cages. Ten thousand torches were lighted at once. The
caliph himself seized a large one of wax; every person followed
his example; and by kindling ropes’ ends, dipped in oil and
fastened on poles, an amazing blaze was spread. The rocks
were covered with the splendour of sunshine. The trails of
sparks, wafted by the wind, communicated to the dry fern,
of which there was plenty. Serpents were observed to crawl
forth from their retreats, with amazement and hissings; whilst
the horses snorted, stamped the ground, tossed their noses in
the air, and plunged about without mercy.</p>

<p>One of the forests of cedar that bordered their way took
fire; and the branches that overhung the path, extending their
flames to the muslins and chintzes which covered the cages of
the ladies, obliged them to jump out, at the peril of their necks.
Vathek, who vented on the occasion a thousand blasphemies,
was himself compelled to touch, with his sacred feet, the naked
earth.</p>

<p>Never had such an incident happened before. Full of
mortification, shame, and despondence, and not knowing how
to walk, the ladies fell into the dirt. “Must I go on foot?”
said one. “Must I wet my feet?” cried another. “Must I
soil my dress?” asked a third. “Execrable Bababalouk!”
exclaimed all. “Outcast of hell! what hast thou to do with
torches? Better were it to be eaten by tigers, than to fall
into our present condition! we are for ever undone! Not a
porter is there in the army, nor a currier of camels, but hath
seen some part of our bodies; and, what is worse, our very
faces!”<a href="#Note_227a" name="Note_49" id="Note_49" class="nanchor">*</a> On saying this the most bashful amongst them hid
their foreheads on the ground, whilst such as had more boldness
flew at Bababalouk; but he, well apprised of their humour, and
not wanting in shrewdness, betook himself to his heels along
with his comrades, all dropping their torches and striking
their timbals.</p>

<p>It was not less light than in the brightest of the dog-days,
and the weather was hot in proportion; but how degrading was
the spectacle, to behold the caliph bespattered, like an ordinary
mortal! As the exercise of his faculties seemed to be suspended,
one of his Ethiopian wives (for he delighted in variety) clasped
him in her arms, threw him upon her shoulder like a sack of
dates, and, finding that the fire was hemming them in, set off
with no small expedition, considering the weight of her burden.
The other ladies, who had just learned the use of their feet,
followed her; their guards galloped after; and the camel-drivers
brought up the rear, as fast as their charge would permit.</p>

<p>They soon reached the spot where the wild beasts had commenced
the carnage, but which they had too much good sense
not to leave at the approaching of the tumult, having made
besides a most luxurious supper. Bababalouk, nevertheless,
seized on a few of the plumpest, which were unable to budge
from the place, and began to flay them with admirable adroitness.
The cavalcade having proceeded so far from the conflagration
that the heat felt rather grateful than violent, it was
immediately resolved on to halt. The tattered chintzes were
picked up; the scraps, left by the wolves and tigers, interred;
and vengeance was taken on some dozens of vultures, that were
too much glutted to rise on the wing. The camels, which had
been left unmolested to make sal ammoniac, being numbered,
and the ladies once more enclosed in their cages, the imperial
tent was pitched on the levellest ground they could find.</p>

<p>Vathek, reposing upon a mattress of down, and tolerably
recovered from the jolting of the Ethiopian, who, to his feelings,
seemed the roughest trotting jade he had hitherto mounted,
called out for something to eat. But, alas! those delicate cakes
which had been baked in silver ovens for his royal mouth, those
rich manchets, amber comfits, flagons of Schiraz wine, porcelain
vases of snow, and grapes from the banks of the Tigris,<a href="#Note_228a" name="Note_50" id="Note_50" class="nanchor">*</a> were all
irremediably lost! And nothing had Bababalouk to present
in their stead but a roasted wolf, vultures <i>à la daube</i>, aromatic
herbs of the most acrid poignancy, rotten truffles, boiled thistles,
and such other wild plants as much ulcerate the throat and
parch up the tongue. Nor was he better provided in the article
of drink; for he could procure nothing to accompany these
irritating viands but a few phials of abominable brandy which
had been secreted by the scullions in their slippers. Vathek
made wry faces at so savage a repast, and Bababalouk answered
them with shrugs and contortions. The caliph, however, ate
with tolerable appetite, and fell into a nap that lasted six
hours.</p>

<p>The splendour of the sun, reflected from the white cliffs of
the mountains, in spite of the curtains that enclosed Vathek,
at length disturbed his repose. He awoke terrified, and stung
to the quick by wormwood-colour flies, which emitted from
their wings a suffocating stench. The miserable monarch was
perplexed how to act, though his wits were not idle in seeking
expedients; whilst Bababalouk lay snoring amidst a swarm of
those insects that busily thronged to pay court to his nose.
The little pages, famished with hunger, had dropped their fans
on the ground, and exerted their dying voices in bitter reproaches
on the caliph, who now, for the first time, heard the language
of truth.</p>

<p>Thus stimulated, he renewed his imprecations against the
Giaour, and bestowed upon Mahomet some soothing expressions.
“Where am I?” cried he: “what are these dreadful rocks—these
valleys of darkness? Are we arrived at the horrible Kaf?<a href="#Note_229a" name="Note_51" id="Note_51" class="nanchor">*</a>
Is the Simurgh<a href="#Note_229b" name="Note_52" id="Note_52" class="nanchor">*</a> coming to pluck out my eyes, as a punishment
for undertaking this impious enterprise?” Having said this
he turned himself towards an outlet in the side of his pavilion;
but, alas! what objects occurred to his view? on one side a
plain of black sand that appeared to be unbounded; and, on
the other, perpendicular crags, bristled over with those abominable
thistles which had so severely lacerated his tongue. He
fancied, however, that he perceived amongst the brambles and
briars some gigantic flowers, but was mistaken; for these were
only the dangling palampores<a href="#Note_229c" name="Note_53" id="Note_53" class="nanchor">*</a> and variegated tatters of his gay
retinue. As there were several clefts in the rock from whence
water seemed to have flowed, Vathek applied his ear with the
hope of catching the sound of some latent torrent; but could
only distinguish the low murmurs of his people, who were
repining at their journey, and complaining for the want of
water. “To what purpose,” asked they, “have we been
brought hither? hath our caliph another tower to build? or
have the relentless afrits,<a href="#Note_229d" name="Note_54" id="Note_54" class="nanchor">*</a> whom Carathis so much loves, fixed
their abode in this place?”</p>

<p>At the name of Carathis, Vathek recollected the tablets he
had received from his mother, who assured him they were
fraught with preternatural qualities,<a href="#Note_229e" name="Note_55" id="Note_55" class="nanchor">*</a> and advised him to consult
them as emergencies might require. Whilst he was engaged
in turning them over, he heard a shout of joy and a loud
clapping of hands. The curtains of his pavilion were soon
drawn back, and he beheld Bababalouk, followed by a troop
of his favourites, conducting two dwarfs,<a href="#Note_230a" name="Note_56" id="Note_56" class="nanchor">*</a> each a cubit high;
who had brought between them a large basket of melons,
oranges, and pomegranates. They were singing in the sweetest
tones the words that follow: “We dwell on the top of these
rocks, in a cabin of rushes and canes; the eagles envy us our
nest: a small spring supplies us with water for the Abdest, and
we daily repeat prayers,<a href="#Note_230b" name="Note_57" id="Note_57" class="nanchor">*</a> which the Prophet approves. We
love you, O commander of the faithful! our master, the good
Emir Fakreddin, loves you also: he reveres, in your person, the
vicegerent of Mahomet. Little as we are, in us he confides: he
knows our hearts to be as good as our bodies are contemptible;
and hath placed us here to aid those who are bewildered on
these dreary mountains. Last night, whilst we were occupied
within our cell in reading the holy Koran,<a href="#Note_230c" name="Note_58" id="Note_58" class="nanchor">*</a> a sudden hurricane
blew out our lights, and rocked our habitation. For two
whole hours, palpable darkness prevailed; but we heard sounds
at a distance, which we conjectured to proceed from the bells
of a cafila,<a href="#Note_230d" name="Note_59" id="Note_59" class="nanchor">*</a> passing over the rocks. Our ears were soon filled
with deplorable shrieks, frightful roarings, and the sound of
timbals. Chilled with terror, we concluded that the Deggial,<a href="#Note_230e" name="Note_60" id="Note_60" class="nanchor">*</a>
with his exterminating angels, had sent forth his plagues on the
earth. In the midst of these melancholy reflections, we perceived
flames of the deepest red glow in the horizon; and found
ourselves, in a few moments, covered with flakes of fire. Amazed
at so strange an appearance, we took up the volume dictated by
the blessed Intelligence,<a href="#Note_230f" name="Note_61" id="Note_61" class="nanchor">*</a> and, kneeling, by the light of the fire
that surrounded us, we recited the verse which says, ‘Put no
trust in any thing but the mercy of Heaven: there is no help,
save in the holy Prophet: the mountain of Kaf itself may
tremble; it is the power of Allah only that cannot be moved.’
After having pronounced these words, we felt consolation, and
our minds were hushed into a sacred repose. Silence ensued,
and our ears clearly distinguished a voice in the air, saying:
‘Servants of my faithful servant! go down to the happy valley
of Fakreddin: tell him that an illustrious opportunity now
offers to satiate the thirst of his hospitable heart. The commander
of true believers is, this day, bewildered amongst these
mountains, and stands in need of thy aid.’—We obeyed with
joy the angelic mission; and our master, filled with pious zeal,
hath culled with his own hands these melons, oranges, and
pomegranates. He is following us, with a hundred dromedaries,
laden with the purest waters of his fountains; and is coming to
kiss the fringe of your consecrated robe,<a href="#Note_231a" name="Note_62" id="Note_62" class="nanchor">*</a> and implore you to
enter his humble habitation,<a href="#Note_231b" name="Note_63" id="Note_63" class="nanchor">*</a> which, placed amidst these barren
wilds, resembles an emerald set in lead.” The dwarfs, having
ended their address, remained still standing, and, with hands
crossed upon their bosoms, preserved a respectful silence.</p>

<p>Vathek, in the midst of this curious harangue, seized the
basket; and, long before it was finished, the fruits had dissolved
in his mouth. As he continued to eat, his piety increased;
and, in the same breath, he recited his prayers and called
for the Koran and sugar.</p>

<p>Such was the state of his mind when the tablets, which were
thrown by at the approach of the dwarfs, again attracted his
eye. He took them up; but was ready to drop on the ground
when he beheld, in large red characters,<a href="#Note_231c" name="Note_64" id="Note_64" class="nanchor">*</a> inscribed by Carathis,
these words—which were, indeed, enough to make him tremble:
“Beware of old doctors and their puny messengers of but one
cubit high: distrust their pious frauds; and, instead of eating
their melons, impale on a spit the bearers of them. Shouldest
thou be such a fool as to visit them, the portal of the subterranean
palace will shut in thy face, with such force as shall
shake thee asunder: thy body shall be spit upon,<a href="#Note_231d" name="Note_65" id="Note_65" class="nanchor">*</a> and bats will
nestle in thy belly.”<a href="#Note_231e" name="Note_66" id="Note_66" class="nanchor">*</a></p>

<p>“To what tends this ominous rhapsody?” cries the caliph;
“and must I, then, perish in these deserts with thirst, whilst
I may refresh myself in the delicious valley of melons and
cucumbers? Accursed be the Giaour with his portal of ebony!
he hath made me dance attendance too long already. Besides,
who shall prescribe laws to me? I, forsooth, must not enter
any one’s habitation! Be it so; but what one can I enter that
is not my own?” Bababalouk, who lost not a syllable of this
soliloquy, applauded it with all his heart; and the ladies, for
the first time, agreed with him in opinion.</p>

<p>The dwarfs were entertained, caressed, and seated, with great
ceremony, on little cushions of satin. The symmetry of their
persons was a subject of admiration; not an inch of them was
suffered to pass unexamined. Knick-knacks and dainties were
offered in profusion; but all were declined with respectful
gravity. They climbed up the sides of the caliph’s seat, and,
placing themselves each on one of his shoulders, began to
whisper prayers in his ears. Their tongues quivered like aspen
leaves; and the patience of Vathek was almost exhausted, when
the acclamations of the troops announced the approach of
Fakreddin, who was come with a hundred old grey-beards, and
as many Korans and dromedaries. They instantly set about
their ablutions, and began to repeat the Bismillah.<a href="#Note_232a" name="Note_67" id="Note_67" class="nanchor">*</a> Vathek, to
get rid of these officious monitors, followed their example, for
his hands were burning.</p>

<p>The good emir, who was punctiliously religious, and likewise
a great dealer in compliments, made an harangue five times
more prolix and insipid than his little harbingers had already
delivered. The caliph, unable any longer to refrain, exclaimed,
“For the love of Mahomet, my dear Fakreddin, have done! let
us proceed to your valley, and enjoy the fruits that Heaven
hath vouchsafed you.” The hint of proceeding put all into
motion. The venerable attendants of the emir set forward
somewhat slowly, but Vathek having ordered his little pages,
in private, to goad on the dromedaries, loud fits of laughter
broke forth from the cages; for the unwieldy curvetting of these
poor beasts, and the ridiculous distress of their superannuated
riders, afforded the ladies no small entertainment.</p>

<p>They descended, however, unhurt into the valley, by the
easy slopes which the emir had ordered to be cut in the rock;
and already the murmuring of streams and the rustling of
leaves began to catch their attention. The cavalcade soon
entered a path, which was skirted by flowering shrubs, and
extended to a vast wood of palm trees, whose branches overspread
a vast building of freestone. This edifice was crowned
with nine domes, and adorned with as many portals of bronze,
on which was engraven the following inscription:<a href="#Note_232b" name="Note_68" id="Note_68" class="nanchor">*</a> “This is the
asylum of pilgrims, the refuge of travellers, and the depository
of secrets from all parts of the world.”</p>

<p>Nine pages, beautiful as the day, and decently clothed in
robes of Egyptian linen, were standing at each door. They
received the whole retinue with an easy and inviting air. Four
of the most amiable placed the caliph on a magnificent tecthtrevan;<a href="#Note_232c" name="Note_69" id="Note_69" class="nanchor">*</a>
four others, somewhat less graceful, took charge of
Bababalouk, who capered for joy at the snug little cabin that
fell to his share: the pages that remained waited on the rest
of the train.</p>

<p>Every man being gone out of sight, the gate of a large enclosure
on the right turned on its harmonious hinges; and a
young female, of a slender form, came forth. Her light brown
hair floated in the hazy breeze of the twilight. A troop of
young maidens, like the Pleiades, attended her on tiptoe. They
hastened to the pavilions that contained the sultanas; and the
young lady, gracefully bending, said to them, “Charming
princesses! everything is ready; we have prepared beds for
your repose, and strewed your apartments with jasmine. No
insects will keep off slumber from visiting your eyelids; we will
dispel them with a thousand plumes. Come, then, amiable
ladies! refresh your delicate feet and your ivory limbs<a href="#Note_233a" name="Note_70" id="Note_70" class="nanchor">*</a> in
baths of rose water;<a href="#Note_233b" name="Note_71" id="Note_71" class="nanchor">*</a> and, by the light of perfumed lamps, your
servants will amuse you with tales.” The sultanas accepted
with pleasure these obliging offers, and followed the young
lady to the emir’s harem; where we must, for a moment, leave
them and return to the caliph.</p>

<p>Vathek found himself beneath a vast dome, illuminated by
a thousand lamps of rock crystal: as many vases of the same
material, filled with excellent sherbet, sparkled on a large table,
where a profusion of viands were spread. Amongst others,
were rice boiled in milk of almonds, saffron soups, and lamb
<i>à la crême</i>;<a href="#Note_233c" name="Note_72" id="Note_72" class="nanchor">*</a> of all which the caliph was amazingly fond. He
took of each as much as he was able; testified his sense of the
emir’s friendship by the gaiety of his heart; and made the
dwarfs dance against their will,<a href="#Note_233d" name="Note_73" id="Note_73" class="nanchor">*</a> for these little devotees durst
not refuse the commander of the faithful.<a href="#Note_233e" name="Note_74" id="Note_74" class="nanchor">*</a> At last, he spread
himself on the sofa, and slept sounder than he ever had before.</p>

<p>Beneath this dome a general silence prevailed; for there was
nothing to disturb it but the jaws of Bababalouk, who had
untrussed himself to eat with greater advantage, being anxious
to make amends for his fast in the mountains. As his spirits
were too high to admit of his sleeping, and hating to be idle,
he proposed with himself to visit the harem, and repair to his
charge of the ladies: to examine if they had been properly
lubricated with the balm of Mecca; if their eyebrows and tresses
were in order; and, in a word, to perform all the little offices
they might need. He sought for a long time together, but
without being able to find out the door. He durst not speak
aloud, for fear of disturbing the caliph; and not a soul was
stirring in the precincts of the palace. He almost despaired
of effecting his purpose, when a low whispering just reached
his ear. It came from the dwarfs, who were returned to their
old occupation, and, for the nine hundred and ninety-ninth
time<a href="#Note_233f" name="Note_75" id="Note_75" class="nanchor">*</a> in their lives, were reading over the Koran. They very
politely invited Bababalouk to be of their party; but his head
was full of other concerns. The dwarfs, though not a little
scandalized at his dissolute morals, directed him to the
apartments he wanted to find. His way thither lay through a
hundred dark corridors, along which he groped as he went, and
at last began to catch, from the extremity of a passage, the
charming gossiping of the women, which not a little delighted his
heart. “Ah, ha! what, not yet asleep?” cried he; and, taking
long strides as he spoke, “did you not suspect me of abjuring
my charge?” Two of the black eunuchs, on hearing a voice so
loud, left their party in haste, sabre in hand,<a href="#Note_234a" name="Note_76" id="Note_76" class="nanchor">*</a> to discover the
cause; but presently was repeated on all sides, “’Tis only
Bababalouk! no one but Bababalouk!” This circumspect
guardian, having gone up to a thin veil of carnation-colour
silk that hung before the doorway, distinguished, by means
of the softened splendour that shone through it, an oval
bath of dark porphyry, surrounded by curtains, festooned
in large folds. Through the apertures between them, as they
were not drawn close, groups of young slaves were visible;
amongst whom Bababalouk perceived his pupils, indulgingly
expanding their arms, as if to embrace the perfumed water
and refresh themselves after their fatigues. The looks of
tender languor; their confidential whispers, and the enchanting
smiles with which they were imparted; the exquisite fragrance
of the roses: all combined to inspire a voluptuousness, which
even Bababalouk himself was scarce able to withstand.</p>

<p>He summoned up, however, his usual solemnity; and, in
the peremptory tone of authority, commanded the ladies
instantly to leave the bath. Whilst he was issuing these
mandates, the young Nouronihar, daughter of the emir, who
was as sprightly as an antelope, and full of wanton gaiety,
beckoned one of her slaves to let down the great swing<a href="#Note_234b" name="Note_77" id="Note_77" class="nanchor">*</a> which
was suspended to the ceiling by cords of silk; and whilst this
was doing, winked to her companions in the bath, who,
chagrined to be forced from so soothing a state of indolence,
began to twist and entangle their hair to plague and detain
Bababalouk, and teased him, besides, with a thousand vagaries.</p>

<p>Nouronihar, perceiving that he was nearly out of patience,
accosted him, with an arch air of respectful concern, and said,
“My lord! it is not by any means decent that the chief eunuch
of the caliph, our sovereign, should thus continue standing;
deign but to recline your graceful person upon this sofa, which
will burst with vexation if it have not the honour to receive
you.” Caught by these flattering accents, Bababalouk gallantly
replied, “Delight of the apple of my eye! I accept
the invitation of your honeyed lips; and, to say truth, my senses
are dazzled with the radiance that beams from your charms.”—“Repose,
then, at your ease,” replied the beauty, as she
placed him on the pretended sofa, which, quicker than lightning,
flew up all at once. The rest of the women, having aptly conceived
her design, sprang naked from the bath, and plied the
swing with such unmerciful jerks that it swept through the
whole compass of a very lofty dome, and took from the poor
victim all power of respiration. Sometimes his feet razed
the surface of the water; and, at others, the skylight almost
flattened his nose. In vain did he fill the air with the cries
of a voice that resembled the ringing of a cracked jar; the
peals of laughter were still predominant.</p>

<p>Nouronihar, in the inebriety of youthful spirits, being used
only to eunuchs of ordinary harems, and having never seen
anything so eminently disgusting, was far more diverted than
all the rest. She began to parody some Persian verses, and
sang, with an accent most demurely piquant, “Oh, gentle
white dove! as thou soar’st through the air, vouchsafe one kind
glance on the mate of thy love: melodious Philomel, I am thy
rose;<a href="#Note_235a" name="Note_78" id="Note_78" class="nanchor">*</a> warble some couplet to ravish my heart!”</p>

<p>The sultanas and their slaves, stimulated by these pleasantries,
persevered at the swing with such unremitted assiduity, that at
length the cord which had secured it snapped suddenly asunder;
and Bababalouk fell, floundering like a turtle, to the bottom of
the bath. This accident occasioned an universal shout. Twelve
little doors, till now unobserved, flew open at once; and the
ladies, in an instant, made their escape; but not before having
heaped all the towels on his head, and put out the lights that
remained.</p>

<p>The deplorable animal, in water to the chin, overwhelmed
with darkness, and unable to extricate himself from the wrappers
that embarrassed him, was still doomed to hear, for his further
consolation, the fresh bursts of merriment his disaster occasioned.
He bustled, but in vain, to get from the bath; for the margin was
become so slippery with the oil spilt in breaking the lamps,
that, at every effort, he slid back with a plunge which resounded
aloud through the hollow of the dome. These cursed peals
of laughter were redoubled at every relapse, and he, who thought
the place infested rather by devils than women, resolved to
cease groping, and abide in the bath; where he amused himself
with soliloquies, interspersed with imprecations, of which his
malicious neighbours, reclining on down, suffered not an accent
to escape. In this delectable plight the morning surprised him.
The caliph, wondering at his absence, had caused him to be
sought for everywhere. At last he was drawn forth almost
smothered from under the wisp of linen, and wet even to the
marrow. Limping, and his teeth chattering with cold, he
approached his master, who inquired what was the matter,
and how he came soused in so strange a pickle.—“And why
did you enter this cursed lodge?” answered Bababalouk
gruffly. “Ought a monarch like you to visit with his harem
the abode of a grey-bearded emir, who knows nothing of life?—And
with what gracious damsels doth the place too abound!
Fancy to yourself how they have soaked me like a burnt crust;
and made me dance like a jack-pudding, the livelong night
through, on their damnable swing. What an excellent lesson
for your sultanas, into whom I had instilled such reserve and
decorum!” Vathek, comprehending not a syllable of all this
invective, obliged him to relate minutely the transaction: but,
instead of sympathizing with the miserable sufferer, he laughed
immoderately at the device of the swing and the figure of
Bababalouk mounted upon it. The stung eunuch could scarcely
preserve the semblance of respect. “Ay, laugh, my lord!
laugh,” said he; “but I wish this Nouronihar would play some
trick on you; she is too wicked to spare even majesty itself.”
These words made, for the present, but a slight impression on
the caliph; but they not long after recurred to his mind.</p>

<p>This conversation was cut short by Fakreddin, who came to
request that Vathek would join in the prayers and ablutions,
to be solemnized on a spacious meadow watered by innumerable
streams. The caliph found the waters refreshing, but the
prayers abominably irksome. He diverted himself, however,
with the multitude of calenders,<a href="#Note_236a" name="Note_79" id="Note_79" class="nanchor">*</a>
santons,<a href="#Note_236b" name="Note_80" id="Note_80" class="nanchor">*</a>
and dervishes,<a href="#Note_236c" name="Note_81" id="Note_81" class="nanchor">*</a> who
were continually coming and going; but especially with the
Brahmins,<a href="#Note_236d" name="Note_82" id="Note_82" class="nanchor">*</a>
fakirs,<a href="#Note_236e" name="Note_83" id="Note_83" class="nanchor">*</a> and other enthusiasts, who had travelled from
the heart of India, and halted on their way with the emir.
These latter had each of them some mummery peculiar to himself.
One dragged a huge chain wherever he went; another an
orang-outang; whilst a third was furnished with scourges; and
all performed to a charm. Some would climb up trees, holding
one foot in the air; others poise themselves over a fire, and
without mercy fillip their noses. There were some amongst
them that cherished vermin, which were not ungrateful in
requiting their caresses. These rambling fanatics revolted the
hearts of the dervishes, the calenders, and santons; however,
the vehemence of their aversion soon subsided, under the hope
that the presence of the caliph would cure their folly, and convert
them to the Mussulman faith. But, alas! how great was
their disappointment! for Vathek, instead of preaching to them,
treated them as buffoons, bade them present his compliments
to Visnow and Ixhora,<a href="#Note_237a" name="Note_84" id="Note_84" class="nanchor">*</a> and discovered a predilection for a squat
old man from the Isle of Serendib, who was more ridiculous
than any of the rest. “Come!” said he, “for the love of your
gods, bestow a few slaps on your chops to amuse me.” The
old fellow, offended at such an address, began loudly to weep;
but, as he betrayed a villainous drivelling in shedding tears,
the caliph turned his back and listened to Bababalouk, who
whispered, whilst he held the umbrella over him, “Your
majesty should be cautious of this odd assembly, which hath
been collected I know not for what. Is it necessary to exhibit
such spectacles to a mighty potentate, with interludes of talapoins<a href="#Note_237b" name="Note_85" id="Note_85" class="nanchor">*</a>
more mangy than dogs? Were I you, I would command a
fire to be kindled, and at once rid the estates of the emir, of his
harem, and all his menagerie.”—“Tush, dolt,” answered Vathek,
“and know that all this infinitely charms me. Nor shall I
leave the meadow till I have visited every hive of these pious
mendicants.”</p>

<p>Wherever the caliph directed his course, objects of pity were
sure to swarm round him; the blind, the purblind, smarts without
noses, damsels without ears, each to extol the munificence
of Fakreddin, who, as well as his attendant grey-beards, dealt
about, gratis, plasters and cataplasms to all that applied. At
noon, a superb corps of cripples made its appearance; and soon
after advanced, by platoons, on the plain, the completest
association of invalids that had ever been embodied till then.
The blind went groping with the blind, the lame limped on
together, and the maimed made gestures to each other with
the only arm that remained. The sides of a considerable waterfall
were crowded by the deaf; amongst whom were some from
Pegû, with ears uncommonly handsome and large, but who
were still less able to hear than the rest. Nor were there wanting
others in abundance with hump-backs, wenny necks, and even
horns of an exquisite polish.</p>

<p>The emir, to aggrandize the solemnity of the festival, in
honour of his illustrious visitant, ordered the turf to be spread
on all sides with skins and table-cloths; upon which were
served up for the good Mussulmans pilaus of every hue, with
other orthodox dishes; and, by the express order of Vathek,
who was shamefully tolerant, small plates of abominations<a href="#Note_237c" name="Note_86" id="Note_86" class="nanchor">*</a>

were prepared, to the great scandal of the faithful. The holy
assembly began to fall to. The caliph, in spite of every remonstrance
from the chief of his eunuchs, resolved to have a dinner
dressed on the spot. The complaisant emir immediately gave
orders for a table to be placed in the shade of the willows. The
first service consisted of fish, which they drew from a river<a href="#Note_238a" name="Note_87" id="Note_87" class="nanchor">*</a>
flowing over sands of gold at the foot of a lofty hill. These
were broiled as fast as taken, and served up with a sauce of
vinegar and small herbs that grew on Mount Sinai;<a href="#Note_238b" name="Note_88" id="Note_88" class="nanchor">*</a> for everything
with the emir was excellent and pious.</p>

<p>The dessert was not quite set on, when the sound of lutes
from the hill was repeated by the echoes of the neighbouring
mountains. The caliph, with an emotion of pleasure and
surprise, had no sooner raised up his head, than a handful of
jasmine dropped on his face. An abundance of tittering
succeeded the frolic, and instantly appeared, through the
bushes, the elegant forms of several young females, skipping
and bounding like roes. The fragrance diffused from their
hair struck the sense of Vathek, who, in an ecstasy, suspending
his repast, said to Bababalouk, “Are the peris<a href="#Note_238c" name="Note_89" id="Note_89" class="nanchor">*</a> come down
from their spheres? Note her, in particular, whose form is so
perfect; venturously running on the brink of the precipice, and
turning back her head, as regardless of nothing but the graceful
flow of her robe. With what captivating impatience doth she
contend with the bushes for her veil? could it be she who threw
the jasmine at me?”—“Ay! she it was; and you too would she
throw, from the top of the rock,” answered Bababalouk, “for
that is my good friend Nouronihar, who so kindly lent me her
swing. My dear lord and master,” added he, wresting a twig
from a willow, “let me correct her for her want of respect: the
emir will have no reason to complain; since (bating what I owe
to his piety) he is much to be blamed for keeping a troop of
girls on the mountains, where the sharpness of the air gives
their blood too brisk a circulation.”</p>

<p>“Peace! blasphemer,” said the caliph; “speak not thus of
her, who, over these mountains, leads my heart a willing captive.
Contrive, rather, that my eyes may be fixed upon hers; that I
may respire her sweet breath as she bounds panting along these
delightful wilds!” On saying these words, Vathek extended
his arms towards the hill; and directing his eyes with an
anxiety unknown to him before, endeavoured to keep within
view the object that enthralled his soul; but her course was
as difficult to follow as the flight of one of those beautiful
blue butterflies of Cashmere<a href="#Note_239a" name="Note_90" id="Note_90" class="nanchor">*</a> which are at once, so volatile
and rare.</p>

<p>The caliph, not satisfied with seeing, wished also to hear
Nouronihar, and eagerly turned to catch the sound of her
voice. At last, he distinguished her whispering to one of her
companions behind the thicket from whence she had thrown the
jasmine: “A caliph, it must be owned, is a fine thing to see:
but my little Gulchenrouz is much more amiable: one lock of
his hair is of more value to me than the richest embroidery of
the Indies. I had rather that his teeth should mischievously
press my finger, than the richest ring of the imperial treasure.
Where have you left him, Sutlememe? and why is he not here?”</p>

<p>The agitated caliph still wished to hear more; but she immediately
retired with all her attendants. The fond monarch pursued
her with his eyes till she was gone out of sight; and then continued
like a bewildered and benighted traveller, from whom
the clouds had obscured the constellation that guided his way.
The curtain of night seemed dropped before him: everything
appeared discoloured. The falling waters filled his soul with
dejection, and his tears trickled down the jasmines he had
caught from Nouronihar, and placed in his inflamed bosom.
He snatched up a few shining pebbles, to remind him of the
scene where he felt the first tumults of love. Two hours were
elapsed, and evening drew on, before he could resolve to depart
from the place. He often, but in vain, attempted to go: a soft
languor enervated the powers of his mind. Extending himself
on the brink of the stream, he turned his eyes towards the blue
summits of the mountain, and exclaimed, “What concealest
thou behind thee, pitiless rock? what is passing in thy solitudes?
Whither is she gone? O heaven! perhaps she is now wandering
in thy grottoes with her happy Gulchenrouz!”</p>

<p>In the meantime, the damps began to descend; and the emir,
solicitous for the health of the caliph, ordered the imperial
litter to be brought. Vathek, absorbed in his reveries, was
imperceptibly removed and conveyed back to the saloon that
received him the evening before. But let us leave the caliph
immersed in his new passion, and attend Nouronihar beyond the
rocks, where she had again joined her beloved Gulchenrouz.</p>

<p>This Gulchenrouz was the son of Ali Hassan, brother to the
emir; and the most delicate and lovely creature in the world.
Ali Hassan, who had been absent ten years on a voyage to the
unknown seas, committed, at his departure, this child, the only
survivor of many, to the care and protection of his brother.
Gulchenrouz could write in various characters with precision,
and paint upon vellum the most elegant arabesques that fancy
could devise. His sweet voice accompanied the lute in the
most enchanting manner; and when he sang the loves of Megnoun
and Leilah,<a href="#Note_240a" name="Note_91" id="Note_91" class="nanchor">*</a> or some unfortunate lovers of ancient days, tears
insensibly overflowed the cheeks of his auditors. The verses
he composed (for, like Megnoun, he, too, was a poet) inspired
that unresisting languor, so frequently fatal to the female heart.
The women all doted upon him; and, though he had passed his
thirteenth year, they still detained him in the harem.<a href="#Note_240b" name="Note_92" id="Note_92" class="nanchor">*</a> His
dancing was light as the gossamer waved by the zephyrs of
spring; but his arms, which twined so gracefully with those of
the young girls in the dance, could neither dart the lance in the
chase,<a href="#Note_240c" name="Note_93" id="Note_93" class="nanchor">*</a> nor curb the steeds that pastured in his uncle’s domains.
The bow, however, he drew with a certain aim, and would have
excelled his competitors in the race, could he have broken the
ties that bound him to Nouronihar.</p>

<p>The two brothers had mutually engaged their children to
each other; and Nouronihar loved her cousin more than her own
beautiful eyes. Both had the same tastes and amusements;
the same long, languishing looks; the same tresses; the same
fair complexions; and, when Gulchenrouz appeared in the dress
of his cousin, he seemed to be more feminine than even herself.
If, at any time, he left the harem to visit Fakreddin, it was with
all the bashfulness of a fawn, that consciously ventures from
the lair of its dam: he was, however, wanton enough to mock
the solemn old grey-beards, though sure to be rated without
mercy in return. Whenever this happened, he would hastily
plunge into the recesses of the harem; and, sobbing, take refuge
in the fond arms of Nouronihar, who loved even his faults
beyond the virtues of others.</p>

<p>It fell out this evening, that, after leaving the caliph in the
meadow, she ran with Gulchenrouz over the green sward of
the mountain that sheltered the vale where Fakreddin had
chosen to reside. The sun was dilated on the edge of the
horizon; and the young people, whose fancies were lively and
inventive, imagined they beheld, in the gorgeous clouds of the
west, the domes of Shaddukian and Ambreabad,<a href="#Note_240d" name="Note_94" id="Note_94" class="nanchor">*</a> where the
Peries have fixed their abode. Nouronihar, sitting on the slope
of the hill, supported on her knees the perfumed head of
Gulchenrouz. The unexpected arrival of the caliph, and the
splendour that marked his appearance, had already filled with
emotion the ardent soul of Nouronihar. Her vanity irresistibly
prompted her to pique the prince’s attention; and this she
before took good care to effect, whilst he picked up the jasmine
she had thrown upon him. But when Gulchenrouz asked
after the flowers he had culled for her bosom, Nouronihar was
all in confusion. She hastily kissed his forehead, arose in a
flutter, and walked with unequal steps on the border of the
precipice. Night advanced, and the pure gold of the setting
sun had yielded to a sanguine red, the glow of which, like the
reflection of a burning furnace, flushed Nouronihar’s animated
countenance. Gulchenrouz, alarmed at the agitation of his
cousin, said to her, with a supplicating accent, “Let us be gone;
the sky looks portentous, the tamarisks tremble more than
common, and the raw wind chills my very heart. Come! let
us be gone; ’tis a melancholy night!” Then taking hold of her
hand, he drew it towards the path he besought her to go.
Nouronihar unconsciously followed the attraction; for a thousand
strange imaginations occupied her spirits. She passed the large
round of honeysuckles, her favourite resort, without ever vouchsafing
it a glance; yet Gulchenrouz could not help snatching off
a few shoots in his way, though he ran as if a wild beast were
behind.</p>

<p>The young females seeing them approach in such haste,
and, according to custom, expecting a dance, instantly assembled
in a circle and took each other by the hand; but Gulchenrouz,
coming up out of breath, fell down at once on the grass. This
accident struck with consternation the whole of this frolicsome
party; whilst Nouronihar, half distracted and overcome, both
by the violence of her exercise and the tumult of her thoughts,
sunk feebly down at his side, cherished his cold hands in her
bosom, and chafed his temples with a fragrant perfume. At
length he came to himself, and wrapping up his head in the
robe of his cousin, entreated that she would not return to the
harem. He was afraid of being snapped at by Shaban his
tutor, a wrinkled old eunuch of a surly disposition; for, having
interrupted the wonted walk of Nouronihar, he dreaded lest
the churl should take it amiss. The whole of this sprightly
group, sitting round upon a mossy knoll, began to entertain
themselves with various pastimes, whilst their superintendents,
the eunuchs, were gravely conversing at a distance. The nurse
of the emir’s daughter, observing her pupil sit ruminating with
her eyes on the ground, endeavoured to amuse her with diverting
tales; to which Gulchenrouz, who had already forgotten his
inquietudes, listened with a breathless attention. He laughed,
he clapped his hands, and passed a hundred little tricks on the
whole of the company, without omitting the eunuchs, whom he
provoked to run after him, in spite of their age and decrepitude.</p>

<p>During these occurrences, the moon arose, the wind subsided,
and the evening became so serene and inviting, that a resolution
was taken to sup on the spot. One of the eunuchs ran to fetch
melons, whilst others were employed in showering down almonds
from the branches that overhung this amiable party. Sutlememe,
who excelled in dressing a salad, having filled large bowls
of porcelain with eggs of small birds, curds turned with citron
juice, slices of cucumber, and the inmost leaves of delicate
herbs, handed it round from one to another, and gave each their
shares with a large spoon of cocknos.<a href="#Note_242a" name="Note_95" id="Note_95" class="nanchor">*</a> Gulchenrouz, nestling,
as usual, in the bosom of Nouronihar, pouted out his vermilion
little lips against the offer of Sutlememe; and would take it
only from the hand of his cousin, on whose mouth he hung,
like a bee inebriated with the nectar of flowers.</p>

<p>In the midst of this festive scene, there appeared a light on
the top of the highest mountain, which attracted the notice
of every eye. This light was not less bright than the moon
when at full, and might have been taken for her, had not the
moon already risen. The phenomenon occasioned a general
surprise, and no one could conjecture the cause. It could not
be a fire, for the light was clear and bluish; nor had meteors
ever been seen of that magnitude or splendour. This strange
light faded for a moment, and immediately renewed its brightness.
It first appeared motionless, at the foot of the rock;
whence it darted in an instant, to sparkle in a thicket of palm-trees:
from thence it glided along the torrent; and at last fixed
in a glen that was narrow and dark. The moment it had
taken its direction, Gulchenrouz, whose heart always trembled
at anything sudden or rare, drew Nouronihar by the robe, and
anxiously requested her to return to the harem. The women
were importunate in seconding the entreaty; but the curiosity
of the emir’s daughter prevailed. She not only refused to go
back, but resolved, at all hazards, to pursue the appearance.</p>

<p>Whilst they were debating what was best to be done, the
light shot forth so dazzling a blaze that they all fled away
shrieking. Nouronihar followed them a few steps; but, coming
to the turn of a little by-path, stopped, and went back alone.
As she ran with an alertness peculiar to herself, it was not long
before she came to the place where they had just been supping.
The globe of fire now appeared stationary in the glen, and
burned in majestic stillness. Nouronihar, pressing her hands
upon her bosom, hesitated, for some moments, to advance.
The solitude of her situation was new, the silence of the night
awful, and every object inspired sensations which, till then,
she never had felt. The affright of Gulchenrouz recurred to
her mind, and she a thousand times turned to go back; but this
luminous appearance was always before her. Urged on by an
irresistible impulse, she continued to approach it, in defiance of
every obstacle that opposed her progress.</p>

<p>At length she arrived at the opening of the glen; but, instead
of coming up to the light, she found herself surrounded by
darkness; excepting that, at a considerable distance, a faint
spark glimmered by fits. She stopped a second time: the
sound of waterfalls mingling their murmurs, the hollow rustlings
among the palm-branches, and the funereal screams of the birds
from their rifted trunks, all conspired to fill her soul with terror.
She imagined, every moment, that she trod on some venomous
reptile. All the stories of malignant dives and dismal ghouls<a href="#Note_243a" name="Note_96" id="Note_96" class="nanchor">*</a>
thronged into her memory; but her curiosity was, notwithstanding,
more predominant than her fears. She therefore firmly
entered a winding track that led towards the spark; but, being
a stranger to the path, she had not gone far, till she began to
repent of her rashness. “Alas!” said she, “that I were but
in those secure and illuminated apartments, where my evenings
glided on with Gulchenrouz! Dear child! how would thy
heart flutter with terror, wert thou wandering in these wild
solitudes, like me!” Thus speaking, she advanced, and coming
up to steps hewn in the rock, ascended them undismayed. The
light, which was now gradually enlarging, appeared above
her on the summit of the mountain, and as if proceeding from a
cavern. At length, she distinguished a plaintive and melodious
union of voices, that resembled the dirges which are sung over
tombs. A sound like that which arises from the filling of baths
struck her ear at the same time. She continued ascending,
and discovered large wax torches in full blaze, planted here
and there in the fissures of the rock. This appearance filled
her with fear, whilst the subtle and potent odour which the
torches exhaled caused her to sink, almost lifeless, at the
entrance of the grot.</p>

<p>Casting her eyes within in this kind of trance, she beheld
a large cistern of gold, filled with a water, the vapour of which
distilled on her face a dew of the essence of roses. A soft
symphony resounded through the grot. On the sides of the
cistern she noticed appendages of royalty, diadems and feathers
of the heron, all sparkling with carbuncles.<a href="#Note_244a" name="Note_97" id="Note_97" class="nanchor">*</a> Whilst her attention
was fixed on this display of magnificence, the music ceased,
and a voice instantly demanded, “For what monarch are
these torches kindled, this bath prepared, and these habiliments
which belong not only to the sovereigns of the earth, but even
to the talismanic powers?” To which a second voice answered,
“They are for the charming daughter of the Emir Fakreddin.”—“What,”
replied the first, “for that trifler, who consumes her
time with a giddy child, immersed in softness, and who, at best,
can make but a pitiful husband?”—“And can she,” rejoined
the other voice, “be amused with such empty toys, whilst the
caliph, the sovereign of the world, he who is destined to enjoy
the treasures of the pre-Adamite sultans, a prince six feet high,
and whose eyes pervade the inmost soul of a female,<a href="#Note_244b" name="Note_98" id="Note_98" class="nanchor">*</a> is inflamed
with love for her? No! she will be wise enough to answer
that passion alone that can aggrandize her glory. No doubt
she will, and despise the puppet of her fancy. Then all the
riches this place contains, as well as the carbuncle of Giamschid,<a href="#Note_244c" name="Note_99" id="Note_99" class="nanchor">*</a>
shall be hers.”—“You judge right,” returned the first voice;
“and I haste to Istakar to prepare the palace of subterranean
fire for the reception of the bridal pair.”</p>

<p>The voices ceased; the torches were extinguished; the most
entire darkness succeeded; and Nouronihar, recovering with a
start, found herself reclined on a sofa in the harem of her father.
She clapped her hands, and immediately came together Gulchenrouz
and her women, who, in despair at having lost her,
had dispatched eunuchs to seek her in every direction. Shaban
appeared with the rest, and began to reprimand her, with an
air of consequence: “Little impertinent,” said he, “have you
false keys, or are you beloved of some genius that hath given
you a picklock? I will try the extent of your power: come
to the dark chamber,<a href="#Note_244d" name="Note_100" id="Note_100" class="nanchor">*</a> and expect not the company of Gulchenrouz:
be expeditious! I will shut you up, and turn the key
twice upon you!” At these menaces, Nouronihar indignantly
raised her head, opened on Shaban her black eyes, which, since
the important dialogue of the enchanted grot, were considerably
enlarged, and said, “Go, speak thus to slaves; but learn
to reverence her who is born to give laws, and subject all to
her power.”</p>

<p>Proceeding in the same style, she was interrupted by a
sudden exclamation of “The caliph! the caliph!” All the
curtains were thrown open, the slaves prostrated themselves
in double rows, and poor little Gulchenrouz went to hide
beneath the couch of a sofa. At first appeared a file of black
eunuchs trailing after them long trains of muslin embroidered
with gold, and holding in their hands censers, which dispensed,
as they passed, the grateful perfume of the wood of aloes.
Next marched Bababalouk with a solemn strut, and tossing
his head, as not overpleased at the visit. Vathek came close
after, superbly robed: his gait was unembarrassed and noble;
and his presence would have engaged admiration, though he
had not been the sovereign of the world. He approached
Nouronihar with a throbbing heart, and seemed enraptured at
the full effulgence of her radiant eyes, of which he had before
caught but a few glimpses; but she instantly depressed them,
and her confusion augmented her beauty.</p>

<p>Bababalouk, who was a thorough adept in coincidences of
this nature, and knew that the worst game should be played
with the best face, immediately made a signal for all to retire;
and no sooner did he perceive beneath the sofa the little one’s
feet, than he drew him forth without ceremony, set him upon
his shoulders, and lavished him, as he went off, a thousand
unwelcome caresses. Gulchenrouz cried out, and resisted till
his cheeks became the colour of the blossom of pomegranates,
and his tearful eyes sparkled with indignation. He cast a
significant glance at Nouronihar, which the caliph noticing,
asked, “Is that, then, your Gulchenrouz?”—“Sovereign of
the world!” answered she, “spare my cousin, whose innocence
and gentleness deserve not your anger!”—“Take
comfort,” said Vathek, with a smile: “he is in good hands.
Bababalouk is fond of children, and never goes without sweetmeats
and comfits.” The daughter of Fakreddin was abashed,
and suffered Gulchenrouz to be borne away without adding a
word. The tumult of her bosom betrayed her confusion, and
Vathek, becoming still more impassioned, gave a loose to his
frenzy; which had only not subdued the last faint strugglings of
reluctance, when the emir, suddenly bursting in, threw his face
upon the ground at the feet of the caliph, and said, “Commander
of the faithful! abase not yourself to the meanness of
your slave.”—“No, emir,” replied Vathek, “I raise her to
an equality with myself: I declare her my wife; and the glory
of your race shall extend from one generation to another.”—“Alas!
my lord,” said Fakreddin, as he plucked off a few grey
hairs of his beard, “cut short the days of your faithful servant,
rather than force him to depart from his word. Nouronihar is
solemnly promised to Gulchenrouz, the son of my brother
Ali Hassan: they are united, also, in heart; their faith is mutually
plighted;<a href="#Note_246a" name="Note_101" id="Note_101" class="nanchor">*</a> and affiances, so sacred, cannot be broken.”—“What
then!” replied the caliph bluntly; “would you surrender this
divine beauty to a husband more womanish than herself? and
can you imagine that I will suffer her charms to decay in hands
so inefficient and nerveless? No! she is destined to live out
her life within my embraces: such is my will; retire, and disturb
not the night I devote to the worship of her charms.”</p>

<p>The irritated emir drew forth his sabre, presented it to
Vathek, and stretching out his neck, said, in a firm tone of
voice, “Strike your unhappy host, my lord: he has lived long
enough, since he hath seen the Prophet’s vicegerent violate the
rights of hospitality.”<a href="#Note_246b" name="Note_102" id="Note_102" class="nanchor">*</a> At his uttering these words, Nouronihar,
unable to support any longer the conflict of her passions, sunk
down into a swoon. Vathek, both terrified for her life and
furious at an opposition to his will, bade Fakreddin assist his
daughter, and withdrew; darting his terrible look at the unfortunate
emir, who suddenly fell backward, bathed in a sweat
as cold as the damp of death.</p>

<p>Gulchenrouz, who had escaped from the hands of Bababalouk,
and was at that instant returned, called out for help as loudly
as he could, not having strength to afford it himself. Pale and
panting, the poor child attempted to revive Nouronihar by
caresses; and it happened, that the thrilling warmth of his lips
restored her to life. Fakreddin, beginning also to recover from
the look of the caliph, with difficulty tottered to a seat; and,
after warily casting round his eye, to see if this dangerous
prince were gone, sent for Shaban and Sutlememe; and said to
them apart, “My friends! violent evils require violent remedies;
the caliph has brought desolation and horror into my family;
and how shall we resist his power? Another of his looks will
send me to the grave. Fetch, then, that narcotic powder<a href="#Note_246c" name="Note_103" id="Note_103" class="nanchor">*</a>
which a dervish brought me from Aracan. A dose of it, the
effect of which will continue three days, must be administered
to each of these children. The caliph will believe them to be
dead; for they will have all the appearance of death. We shall
go as if to inter them in the cave of Meimouné, at the entrance
of the great desert of sand, and near the bower of my dwarfs.
When all the spectators shall be withdrawn, you, Shaban, and
four select eunuchs, shall convey them to the lake; where
provision shall be ready to support them a month: for one day
allotted to the surprise this event will occasion, five to the
tears, a fortnight to reflection, and the rest to prepare for
renewing his progress, will, according to my calculation, fill
up the whole time that Vathek will tarry; and I shall then be
freed from his intrusion.”</p>

<p>“Your plan is good,” said Sutlememe, “if it can but be
effected. I have remarked, that Nouronihar is well able to
support the glances of the caliph, and that he is far from being
sparing of them to her; be assured, therefore, that, notwithstanding
her fondness for Gulchenrouz, she will never remain
quiet, while she knows him to be here. Let us persuade her
that both herself and Gulchenrouz are really dead, and that
they were conveyed to those rocks, for a limited season, to
expiate the little faults of which their love was the cause. We
will add, that we killed ourselves in despair; and that your
dwarfs, whom they never yet saw, will preach to them delectable
sermons. I will engage that everything shall succeed to the
bent of your wishes.”—“Be it so!” said Fakreddin: “I approve
your proposal: let us lose not a moment to give it effect.”</p>

<p>They hastened to seek for the powder, which, being mixed in
a sherbet was immediately administered to Gulchenrouz and
Nouronihar. Within the space of an hour, both were seized with
violent palpitations, and a general numbness gradually ensued.
They arose from the floor where they had remained ever since
the caliph’s departure, and, ascending to the sofa, reclined
themselves upon it, clasped in each other’s embraces. “Cherish
me, my dear Nouronihar!” said Gulchenrouz: “put thy hand
upon my heart; it feels as if it were frozen. Alas! thou art as
cold as myself! hath the caliph murdered us both, with his
terrible look?”—“I am dying!” cried she, in a faltering voice:
“press me closer; I am ready to expire!”—“Let us die, then,
together,” answered the little Gulchenrouz, whilst his breast
laboured with a convulsive sigh; “let me, at least, breathe
forth my soul on thy lips!” They spoke no more, and became
as dead.</p>

<p>Immediately the most piercing cries were heard through the
harem; whilst Shaban and Sutlememe personated, with great
adroitness, the parts of persons in despair. The emir, who
was sufficiently mortified to be forced into such untoward
expedients, and had now, for the first time, made a trial of his
powder, was under no necessity of counterfeiting grief. The
slaves, who had flocked together from all quarters, stood motionless
at the spectacle before them. All lights were extinguished,
save two lamps, which shed a wan glimmering over the faces of
these lovely flowers, that seemed to be faded in the spring-time
of life. Funeral vestments were prepared; their bodies were
washed<a href="#Note_248a" name="Note_104" id="Note_104" class="nanchor">*</a> with rose-water; their beautiful tresses were braided
and incensed; and they were wrapped in cymars whiter than
alabaster.</p>

<p>At the moment that their attendants were placing two wreaths
of their favourite jasmines on their brows, the caliph, who had
just heard the tragical catastrophe, arrived. He looked not less
pale and haggard than the ghouls that wander at night among
the graves. Forgetful of himself and every one else, he broke
through the midst of the slaves; fell prostrate at the foot of the
sofa; beat his bosom; called himself “atrocious murderer!”
and invoked upon his head a thousand imprecations. With a
trembling hand he raised the veil that covered the countenance
of Nouronihar, and uttering a loud shriek, fell lifeless on the
floor. The chief of the eunuchs dragged him off, with horrible
grimaces, and repeated as he went, “Ay, I foresaw she would
play you some ungracious turn!”</p>

<p>No sooner was the caliph gone, than the emir commanded
biers to be brought, and forbade that any one should enter the
harem. Every window was fastened; all instruments of music
were broken;<a href="#Note_248b" name="Note_105" id="Note_105" class="nanchor">*</a>
and the imans began to recite their prayers.<a href="#Note_248c" name="Note_106" id="Note_106" class="nanchor">*</a>
Towards the close of this melancholy day, Vathek sobbed in
silence; for they had been forced to compose with anodynes
his convulsions of rage and desperation.</p>

<p>At the dawn of the succeeding morning, the wide folding
doors of the palace were set open, and the funeral procession
moved forward for the mountain. The wailful cries of “La
Ilah illa Alla!”<a href="#Note_248d" name="Note_107" id="Note_107" class="nanchor">*</a> reached the caliph, who was eager to cicatrize
himself and attend the ceremonial; nor could he have been
dissuaded, had not his excessive weakness disabled him from
walking. At the few first steps he fell on the ground, and
his people were obliged to lay him on a bed, where he remained
many days in such a state of insensibility as excited compassion
in the emir himself.</p>

<p>When the procession was arrived at the grot of Meimouné,
Shaban and Sutlememe dismissed the whole of the train,
excepting the four confidential eunuchs who were appointed
to remain. After resting some moments near the biers, which
had been left in the open air, they caused them to be carried to
the brink of a small lake, whose banks were overgrown with
a hoary moss. This was the great resort of herons and storks,
which preyed continually on little blue fishes. The dwarfs,
instructed by the emir, soon repaired thither, and, with the
help of the eunuchs, began to construct cabins of rushes and
reeds, a work in which they had admirable skill. A magazine
also was contrived for provisions, with a small oratory for themselves,
and a pyramid of wood, neatly piled, to furnish the
necessary fuel, for the air was bleak in the hollows of the
mountains.</p>

<p>At evening two fires were kindled on the brink of the lake,
and the two lovely bodies, taken from their biers, were carefully
deposited upon a bed of dried leaves within the same
cabin. The dwarfs began to recite the Koran, with their clear
shrill voices; and Shaban and Sutlememe stood at some distance,
anxiously waiting the effects of the powder. At length Nouronihar
and Gulchenrouz faintly stretched out their arms; and,
gradually opening their eyes, began to survey, with looks of
increasing amazement, every object around them. They even
attempted to rise; but, for want of strength, fell back again.
Sutlememe, on this, administered a cordial, which the emir had
taken care to provide.</p>

<p>Gulchenrouz, thoroughly aroused, sneezed out aloud; and,
raising himself with an effort that expressed his surprise, left
the cabin and inhaled the fresh air with the greatest avidity.
“Yes,” said he, “I breathe again! again do I exist! I hear sounds!
I behold a firmament, spangled over with stars!” Nouronihar,
catching these beloved accents, extricated herself from the
leaves and ran to clasp Gulchenrouz to her bosom. The first
objects she remarked were their long cymars, their garlands of
flowers, and their naked feet: she hid her face in her hands to
reflect. The vision of the enchanted bath, the despair of her
father, and, more vividly than both, the majestic figure of
Vathek, recurred to her memory. She recollected, also, that
herself and Gulchenrouz had been sick and dying; but all these
images bewildered her mind. Not knowing where she was, she
turned her eyes on all sides, as if to recognize the surrounding
scene. This singular lake, those flames reflected from its glassy
surface, the pale hues of its banks, the romantic cabins, the
bulrushes that sadly waved their drooping heads, the storks
whose melancholy cries blended with the shrill voices of the
dwarfs—everything conspired to persuade her that the angel
of death had opened the portal of some other world.<a href="#Note_249a" name="Note_108" id="Note_108" class="nanchor">*</a></p>

<p>Gulchenrouz on his part, lost in wonder, clung to the neck
of his cousin. He believed himself in the region of phantoms,
and was terrified at the silence she preserved. At length
addressing her: “Speak,” said he; “where are we? Do you
not see those spectres that are stirring the burning coals? Are
they Monker and Nekir<a href="#Note_250a" name="Note_109" id="Note_109" class="nanchor">*</a> who are come to throw us into them?
Does the fatal bridge<a href="#Note_250b" name="Note_110" id="Note_110" class="nanchor">*</a> cross this lake, whose solemn stillness
perhaps conceals from us an abyss, in which for whole ages
we shall be doomed incessantly to sink?”</p>

<p>“No, my children,” said Sutlememe, going towards them;
“take comfort! the exterminating angel, who conducted our
souls hither after yours, hath assured us, that the chastisement
of your indolent and voluptuous life shall be restricted to a
certain series of years,<a href="#Note_250c" name="Note_111" id="Note_111" class="nanchor">*</a> which you must pass in this dreary
abode; where the sun is scarcely visible, and where the soil
yields neither fruits nor flowers. These,” continued she,
pointing to the dwarfs, “will provide for our wants; for souls
so mundane as ours retain too strong a tincture of their earthly
extraction. Instead of meats, your food will be nothing but
rice; and your bread shall be moistened in the fogs that brood
over the surface of the lake.”</p>

<p>At this desolating prospect, the poor children burst into tears,
and prostrated themselves before the dwarfs; who perfectly
supported their characters, and delivered an excellent discourse,
of a customary length, upon the sacred camel<a href="#Note_250d" name="Note_112" id="Note_112" class="nanchor">*</a> which, after a
thousand years, was to convey them to the paradise of the
faithful.</p>

<p>The sermon being ended, and ablutions performed, they
praised Alla and the Prophet, supped very indifferently, and
retired to their withered leaves. Nouronihar and her little
cousin consoled themselves on finding that the dead might lie
in one cabin. Having slept well before, the remainder of the
night was spent in conversation on what had befallen them;
and both, from a dread of apparitions, betook themselves for
protection to one another’s arms.</p>

<p>In the morning, which was lowering and rainy, the dwarfs
mounted high poles, like minarets, and called them to prayers.
The whole congregation, which consisted of Sutlememe, Shaban,
the four eunuchs, and a few storks that were tired of fishing,
was already assembled. The two children came forth from
their cabin with a slow and dejected pace. As their minds
were in a tender and melancholy mood, their devotions were
performed with fervour. No sooner were they finished than
Gulchenrouz demanded of Sutlememe and the rest, “how they
happened to die so opportunely for his cousin and himself?”—“We
killed ourselves,” returned Sutlememe, “in despair at
your death.” On this, Nouronihar, who, notwithstanding what
had passed, had not yet forgotten her vision, said, “And the
caliph! is he also dead of his grief? and will he likewise come
hither?” The dwarfs, who were prepared with an answer,
most demurely replied, “Vathek is damned beyond all redemption!”—“I
readily believe so,” said Gulchenrouz; “and am
glad, from my heart, to hear it; for I am convinced it was his
horrible look that sent us hither, to listen to sermons, and
mess upon rice.” One week passed away on the side of the
lake unmarked by any variety; Nouronihar ruminating on the
grandeur of which death had deprived her, and Gulchenrouz
applying to prayers and basket-making<a href="#Note_251a" name="Note_113" id="Note_113" class="nanchor">*</a> with the dwarfs, who
infinitely pleased him.</p>

<p>Whilst this scene of innocence was exhibiting in the mountains,
the caliph presented himself to the emir in a new light.<a href="#Note_251b" name="Note_114" id="Note_114" class="nanchor">*</a>
The instant he recovered the use of his senses, with a voice that
made Bababalouk quake, he thundered out, “Perfidious
Giaour! I renounce thee for ever! it is thou who hast slain my
beloved Nouronihar! and I supplicate the pardon of Mahomet,
who would have preserved her to me had I been more wise.
Let water be brought to perform my ablutions, and let the
pious Fakreddin be called to offer up his prayers with mine,
and reconcile me to him. Afterwards, we will go together and
visit the sepulchre of the unfortunate Nouronihar. I am
resolved to become a hermit, and consume the residue of my
days on this mountain, in hope of expiating my crimes.”—“And
what do you intend to live upon there?” inquired
Bababalouk.—“I hardly know,” replied Vathek; “but I will
tell you when I feel hungry—which, I believe, will not soon
be the case.”</p>

<p>The arrival of Fakreddin put a stop to this conversation.
As soon as Vathek saw him, he threw his arms around his neck,
bedewed his face with a torrent of tears, and uttered things
so affecting, so pious, that the emir, crying for joy, congratulated
himself in his heart upon having performed so admirable and
unexpected a conversion. As for the pilgrimage to the mountain,
Fakreddin had his reasons not to oppose it; therefore,
each ascending his own litter, they started.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding the vigilance with which his attendants
watched the caliph, they could not prevent his harrowing his
cheeks with a few scratches, when on the place where he was
told Nouronihar had been buried; they were even obliged to
drag him away, by force of hands, from the melancholy spot.
However, he swore, with a solemn oath, that he would return
thither every day. This resolution did not exactly please the
emir—yet he flattered himself that the caliph might not proceed
farther, and would merely perform his devotions in the
cavern of Meimouné. Besides, the lake was so completely
concealed within the solitary bosom of those tremendous
rocks, that he thought it utterly impossible any one could ever
find it. This security of Fakreddin was also considerably
strengthened by the conduct of Vathek, who performed his
vow most scrupulously, and returned daily from the hill so
devout, and so contrite, that all the grey-beards were in a state
of ecstasy on account of it.</p>

<p>Nouronihar was not altogether so content; for though she
felt a fondness for Gulchenrouz, who, to augment the attachment,
had been left at full liberty with her, yet she still regarded
him as but a bauble that bore no competition with the carbuncle
of Giamschid. At times, she indulged doubts on the mode
of her being; and scarcely could believe that the dead had all
the wants and the whims of the living. To gain satisfaction,
however, on so perplexing a topic, one morning, whilst all were
asleep, she arose with a breathless caution from the side of
Gulchenrouz; and, after having given him a soft kiss, began to
follow the windings of the lake, till it terminated with a rock,
the top of which was accessible, though lofty. This she climbed
with considerable toil; and having reached the summit, set
forward in a run, like a doe before the hunter. Though she
skipped with the alertness of an antelope, yet, at intervals,
she was forced to desist, and rest beneath the tamarisks to
recover her breath. Whilst she, thus reclined, was occupied
with her little reflections on the apprehension that she had
some knowledge of the place, Vathek, who, finding himself
that morning but ill at ease, had gone forth before the dawn,
presented himself on a sudden to her view. Motionless with
surprise, he durst not approach the figure before him trembling
and pale, but yet lovely to behold. At length Nouronihar,
with a mixture of pleasure and affliction, raising her fine eyes
to him, said, “My lord! are you then come hither to eat rice
and hear sermons with me?”—“Beloved phantom!” cried
Vathek, “thou dost speak; thou hast the same graceful form;
the same radiant features; art thou palpable likewise?” and,
eagerly embracing her, added, “Here are limbs and a bosom
animated with a gentle warmth!—What can such a prodigy
mean?”</p>

<p>
Nouronihar, with indifference, answered,—“You know, my
lord, that I died on the very night you honoured me with
your visit. My cousin maintains it was from one of your
glances; but I cannot believe him; for to me they seem not so
dreadful. Gulchenrouz died with me, and we were both brought
into a region of desolation, where we are fed with a wretched
diet. If you be dead also, and are come hither to join us, I
pity your lot; for you will be stunned with the clang of the
dwarfs and the storks. Besides, it is mortifying in the extreme,
that you, as well as myself, should have lost the treasures of
the subterranean palace.”</p>

<p>At the mention of the subterranean palace, the caliph suspended
his caresses (which, indeed, had proceeded pretty far),
to seek from Nouronihar an explanation of her meaning. She
then recapitulated her vision, what immediately followed,
and the history of her pretended death; adding, also, a description
of the place of expiation from whence she had fled; and
all in a manner that would have extorted his laughter, had not
the thoughts of Vathek been too deeply engaged. No sooner,
however, had she ended, than he again clasped her to his bosom
and said, “Light of my eyes, the mystery is unravelled; we
both are alive! Your father is a cheat, who, for the sake of
dividing us, hath deluded us both; and the Giaour, whose
design, as far as I can discover, is that we shall proceed together,
seems scarce a whit better. It shall be some time at least
before he finds us in his palace of fire. Your lovely little person
in my estimation is far more precious than all the treasures
of the pre-Adamite sultans; and I wish to possess it at pleasure,
and in open day, for many a moon, before I go to burrow underground,
like a mole. Forget this little trifler, Gulchenrouz;
and——”—“Ah, my lord!” interposed Nouronihar, “let me
entreat that you do him no evil.”—“No, no!” replied Vathek;
“I have already bid you forbear to alarm yourself for him.
He has been brought up too much on milk and sugar to stimulate
my jealousy. We will leave him with the dwarfs; who, by
the by, are my old acquaintances: their company will suit
him far better than yours. As to other matters, I will return
no more to your father’s. I want not to have my ears dinned
by him and his dotards with the violation of the rights of
hospitality, as if it were less an honour for you to espouse the
sovereign of the world than a girl dressed up like a boy.”</p>

<p>Nouronihar could find nothing to oppose in a discourse
so eloquent. She only wished the amorous monarch had
discovered more ardour for the carbuncle of Giamschid; but
flattered herself it would gradually increase, and therefore
yielded to his will with the most bewitching submission.</p>

<p>When the caliph judged it proper, he called for Bababalouk,
who was asleep in the cave of Meimouné, and dreaming that
the phantom of Nouronihar, having mounted him once more
on her swing, had just given him such a jerk, that he one
moment soared above the mountains, and the next sunk into
the abyss. Starting from his sleep at the sound of his master,
he ran, gasping for breath, and had nearly fallen backward at
the sight, as he believed, of the spectre by whom he had so
lately been haunted in his dream. “Ah, my lord!” cried he,
recoiling ten steps, and covering his eyes with both hands,
“do you then perform the office of a ghoul? have you dug up the
dead? Yet hope not to make her your prey; for, after all she
hath caused me to suffer, she is wicked enough to prey even
upon you.”</p>

<p>“Cease to play the fool,” said Vathek, “and thou shalt soon
be convinced that it is Nouronihar herself, alive and well, whom
I clasp to my breast. Go and pitch my tents in the neighbouring
valley. There will I fix my abode, with this beautiful
tulip, whose colours I soon shall restore. There exert thy best
endeavours to procure whatever can augment the enjoyments
of life, till I shall disclose to thee more of my will.”</p>

<p>The news of so unlucky an event soon reached the ears of
the emir, who abandoned himself to grief and despair, and
began, as did his old grey-beards, to begrime his visage with
ashes. A total supineness ensued; travellers were no longer
entertained; no more plasters were spread; and, instead of the
charitable activity that had distinguished this asylum, the
whole of its inhabitants exhibited only faces of half a cubit
long, and uttered groans that accorded with their forlorn
situation.</p>

<p>Though Fakreddin bewailed his daughter as lost to him for
ever, yet Gulchenrouz was not forgotten. He dispatched
immediate instructions to Sutlememe, Shaban, and the dwarfs,
enjoining them not to undeceive the child in respect to his
state, but, under some pretence, to convey him far from the
lofty rock at the extremity of the lake, to a place which he
should appoint, as safer from danger, for he suspected that
Vathek intended him evil.</p>

<p>Gulchenrouz, in the meanwhile, was filled with amazement
at not finding his cousin; nor were the dwarfs less surprised:
but Sutlememe, who had more penetration, immediately guessed
what had happened. Gulchenrouz was amused with the delusive
hope of once more embracing Nouronihar in the interior recesses
of the mountains, where the ground, strewed over with orange
blossoms and jasmines, offered beds much more inviting than
the withered leaves in their cabin; where they might accompany
with their voices the sounds of their lutes, and chase butterflies.
Sutlememe was far gone in this sort of description, when one of
the four eunuchs beckoned her aside, to apprise her of the
arrival of a messenger from their fraternity, who had explained
the secret of the flight of Nouronihar, and brought the commands
of the emir. A council with Shaban and the dwarfs was immediately
held. Their baggage being stowed in consequence of it,
they embarked in a shallop, and quietly sailed with the little
one, who acquiesced in all their proposals. Their voyage
proceeded in the same manner, till they came to the place where
the lake sinks beneath the hollow of a rock: but as soon as the
bark had entered it, and Gulchenrouz found himself surrounded
with darkness, he was seized with a dreadful consternation, and
incessantly uttered the most piercing outcries; for he now was
persuaded he should actually be damned for having taken too
many little freedoms in his lifetime with his cousin.</p>

<p>But let us return to the caliph, and her who ruled over his
heart. Bababalouk had pitched the tents, and closed up the
extremities of the valley with magnificent screens of India
cloth, which were guarded by Ethiopian slaves with their drawn
sabres. To preserve the verdure of this beautiful enclosure in
its natural freshness, white eunuchs went continually round it
with gilt water vessels. The waving of fans<a href="#Note_255a" name="Note_115" id="Note_115" class="nanchor">*</a> was heard near
the imperial pavilion; where, by the voluptuous light that
glowed through the muslins, the caliph enjoyed, at full view,
all the attractions of Nouronihar. Inebriated with delight,
he was all ear to her charming voice, which accompanied the
lute; while she was not less captivated with his descriptions of
Samarah, and the tower full of wonders, but especially with
his relation of the adventure of the ball, and the chasm of the
Giaour, with its ebony portal.</p>

<p>In this manner they conversed the whole day, and at night
they bathed together in a basin of black marble, which admirably
set off the fairness of Nouronihar. Bababalouk, whose
good graces this beauty had regained, spared no attention,
that their repasts might be served up with the minutest exactness:
some exquisite rarity was ever placed before them; and he
sent even to Schiraz, for that fragrant and delicious wine which
had been hoarded up in bottles, prior to the birth of Mahomet.<a href="#Note_256a" name="Note_116" id="Note_116" class="nanchor">*</a>
He had excavated little ovens in the rock,<a href="#Note_256b" name="Note_117" id="Note_117" class="nanchor">*</a> to bake the nice
manchets which were prepared by the hands of Nouronihar,
from whence they had derived a flavour so grateful to Vathek,
that he regarded the ragouts of his other wives as entirely
mawkish: whilst they would have died of chagrin at the emir’s,
at finding themselves so neglected, if Fakreddin, notwithstanding
his resentment, had not taken pity upon them.</p>

<p>The Sultana Dilara, who, till then, had been the favourite,
took this dereliction of the caliph to heart, with a vehemence
natural to her character; for, during her continuance in favour,
she had imbibed from Vathek many of his extravagant fancies,
and was fired with impatience to behold the superb tombs of
Istakar, and the palace of forty columns; besides, having been
brought up amongst the magi, she had fondly cherished the
idea of the caliph’s devoting himself to the worship of fire: thus
his voluptuous and desultory life with her rival was to her a
double source of affliction. The transient piety of Vathek had
occasioned her some serious alarms; but the present was an
evil of far greater magnitude. She resolved, therefore, without
hesitation, to write to Carathis, and acquaint her that all things
went ill; that they had eaten, slept, and revelled at an old
emir’s, whose sanctity was very formidable; and that, after
all, the prospect of possessing the treasures of the pre-Adamite
sultans was no less remote than before. This letter was entrusted
to the care of two woodmen, who were at work in one of the
great forests of the mountains, and who, being acquainted with
the shortest cuts, arrived in ten days at Samarah.</p>

<p>The Princess Carathis was engaged at chess with Morakanabad,
when the arrival of these woodfellers was announced. She, after
some weeks of Vathek’s absence, had forsaken the upper regions
of her tower, because everything appeared in confusion among
the stars, which she consulted relative to the fate of her son.
In vain did she renew her fumigations, and extend herself on
the roof, to obtain mystic visions; nothing more could she see
in her dreams, than pieces of brocade, nosegays of flowers, and
other unmeaning gewgaws. These disappointments had thrown
her into a state of dejection, which no drug in her power was
sufficient to remove. Her only resource was in Morakanabad,
who was a good man, and endowed with a decent share of
confidence; yet whilst in her company he never thought himself
on roses.</p>

<p>
No person knew aught of Vathek, and, of course, a thousand
ridiculous stories were propagated at his expense. The eagerness
of Carathis may be easily guessed at receiving the letter,
as well as her rage at reading the dissolute conduct of her son.
“Is it so?” said she; “either I will perish, or Vathek shall enter
the palace of fire. Let me expire in flames, provided he may
reign on the throne of Soliman!” Having said this, and
whirled herself round in a magical manner, which struck
Morakanabad with such terror as caused him to recoil, she
ordered her great camel Alboufaki<a href="#Note_257a" name="Note_118" id="Note_118" class="nanchor">*</a> to be brought, and the
hideous Nerkes, with the unrelenting Cafour, to attend. “I
require no other retinue,” said she to Morakanabad; “I am
going on affairs of emergency; a truce, therefore, to parade!
Take you care of the people: fleece them well in my absence;
for we shall expend large sums, and one knows not what may
betide.”</p>

<p>The night was uncommonly dark, and a pestilential blast
blew from the plain of Catoul, that would have deterred any
other traveller, however urgent the call: but Carathis enjoyed
most whatever filled others with dread. Nerkes concurred in
opinion with her; and Cafour had a particular predilection for
a pestilence. In the morning this accomplished caravan, with
the woodfellers, who directed their route, halted on the edge
of an extensive marsh, from whence so noxious a vapour arose
as would have destroyed any animal but Alboufaki, who
naturally inhaled these malignant fogs with delight. The
peasants entreated their convoy not to sleep in this place.
“To sleep,” cried Carathis, “what an excellent thought! I
never sleep, but for visions; and, as to my attendants, their
occupations are too many to close the only eye they have.”
The poor peasants, who were not overpleased with their party,
remained open-mouthed with surprise.</p>

<p>Carathis alighted, as well as her negresses; and, severally
stripping off their outer garments, they all ran to cull from
those spots where the sun shone fiercest the venomous plants
that grew on the marsh. This provision was made for the
family of the emir, and whoever might retard the expedition
to Istakar. The woodmen were overcome with fear, when
they beheld these three horrible phantoms run; and, not much
relishing the company of Alboufaki, stood aghast at the command
of Carathis to set forward, notwithstanding it was noon,<a href="#Note_257b" name="Note_119" id="Note_119" class="nanchor">*</a> and the
heat fierce enough to calcine even rocks. In spite, however, of
every remonstrance, they were forced implicitly to submit.</p>

<p>
Alboufaki, who delighted in solitude, constantly snorted whenever
he perceived himself near a habitation; and Carathis, who
was apt to spoil him with indulgence, as constantly turned him
aside: so that the peasants were precluded from procuring subsistence;
for the milch goats and ewes, which Providence had
sent towards the district they traversed to refresh travellers
with their milk, all fled at the sight of the hideous animal and
his strange riders. As to Carathis, she needed no common
aliment; for her invention had previously furnished her with
an opiate to stay her stomach, some of which she imparted
to her mutes.</p>

<p>At dusk Alboufaki, making a sudden stop, stamped with his
foot; which, to Carathis, who knew his ways, was a certain
indication that she was near the confines of some cemetery.<a href="#Note_258a" name="Note_120" id="Note_120" class="nanchor">*</a>
The moon shed a bright light on the spot, which served to
discover a long wall with a large door in it, standing ajar, and
so high that Alboufaki might easily enter. The miserable
guides, who perceived their end approaching, humbly implored
Carathis, as she had now so good an opportunity, to inter them,
and immediately gave up the ghost. Nerkes and Cafour, whose
wit was of a style peculiar to themselves, were by no means
parsimonious of it on the folly of these poor people; nor could
anything have been found more suited to their taste than the
site of the burying-ground, and the sepulchres which its precincts
contained. There were at least two thousand of them on
the declivity of a hill. Carathis was too eager to execute her
plan to stop at the view, charming as it appeared in her eyes.
Pondering the advantages that might accrue from her present
situation, she said to herself, “So beautiful a cemetery must be
haunted by ghouls! they never want for intelligence: having
heedlessly suffered my stupid guides to expire, I will apply
for directions to them; and, as an inducement, will invite them
to regale on these fresh corpses.” After this wise soliloquy,
she beckoned to Nerkes and Cafour, and made signs with her
fingers, as much as to say, “Go; knock against the sides of the
tombs, and strike up your delightful warblings.”</p>

<p>The negresses, full of joy at the behests of their mistress,
and promising themselves much pleasure from the society of
the ghouls, went with an air of conquest, and began their
knockings at the tombs. As their strokes were repeated, a
hollow noise was made in the earth; the surface hove up into
heaps; and the ghouls, on all sides, protruded their noses to
inhale the effluvia which the carcasses of the woodmen began
to emit. They assembled before a sarcophagus of white marble,
where Carathis was seated between the bodies of her miserable
guides. The princess received her visitants with distinguished
politeness; and, supper being ended, they talked of business.
Carathis soon learned from them everything she wanted to
discover; and, without loss of time, prepared to set forward
on her journey. Her negresses, who were forming tender connections
with the ghouls, importuned her, with all their fingers,
to wait at least till the dawn. But Carathis, being chastity in
the abstract, and an implacable enemy to love intrigues and
sloth, at once rejected their prayer, mounted Alboufaki, and
commanded them to take their seats instantly. Four days and
four nights she continued her route without interruption. On
the fifth, she traversed craggy mountains and half-burnt
forests; and arrived on the sixth before the beautiful screens
which concealed from all eyes the voluptuous wanderings of
her son.</p>

<p>It was daybreak, and the guards were snoring on their posts
in careless security, when the rough trot of Alboufaki awoke
them in consternation. Imagining that a group of spectres,
ascended from the abyss, was approaching, they all, without
ceremony, took to their heels. Vathek was at that instant
with Nouronihar in the bath, hearing tales, and laughing at
Bababalouk who related them; but, no sooner did the outcry
of his guards reach him, than he flounced from the water like a
carp, and as soon threw himself back at the sight of Carathis;
who, advancing with her negresses upon Alboufaki, broke
through the muslin awnings and veils of the pavilion. At this
sudden apparition, Nouronihar (for she was not at all times
free from remorse) fancied that the moment of celestial vengeance
was come, and clung about the caliph in amorous
despondence.</p>

<p>Carathis, still seated on her camel, foamed with indignation
at the spectacle which obtruded itself on her chaste view. She
thundered forth without check or mercy, “Thou double-headed
and four-legged monster! what means all this winding and
writhing? Art thou not ashamed to be seen grasping this
limber sapling, in preference to the sceptre of the pre-Adamite
sultans? Is it then for this paltry doxy that thou hast violated
the conditions in the parchment of our Giaour? Is it on her
thou hast lavished thy precious moments? Is this the fruit of
the knowledge I have taught thee? Is this the end of thy
journey? Tear thyself from the arms of this little simpleton;
drown her in the water before me, and instantly follow my
guidance.”</p>

<p>In the first ebullition of his fury, Vathek had resolved to rip
open the body of Alboufaki, and to stuff it with those of the
negresses and of Carathis herself; but the remembrance of the
Giaour, the palace of Istakar, the sabres, and the talismans,
flashing before his imagination with the simultaneousness of
lightning, he became more moderate, and said to his mother
in a civil, but decisive tone, “Dread lady, you shall be obeyed;
but I will not drown Nouronihar. She is sweeter to me than a
Myrabolan comfit;<a href="#Note_260a" name="Note_121" id="Note_121" class="nanchor">*</a> and is enamoured of carbuncles, especially
that of Giamschid, which hath also been promised to be conferred
upon her: she, therefore, shall go along with us; for I
intend to repose with her upon the sofas of Soliman: I can
sleep no more without her.”—“Be it so,” replied Carathis,
alighting, and at the same time committing Alboufaki to the
charge of her black women.</p>

<p>Nouronihar, who had not yet quitted her hold, began to take
courage; and said, with an accent of fondness to the caliph,
“Dear sovereign of my soul! I will follow thee, if it be thy
will, beyond the Kaf, in the land of the afrits. I will not
hesitate to climb, for thee, the nest of the Simurgh; who, this
lady excepted, is the most awful of created beings.”—“We
have here, then,” subjoined Carathis, “a girl both of courage
and science!” Nouronihar had certainly both; but, notwithstanding
all her firmness, she could not help casting back a
thought of regret upon the graces of her little Gulchenrouz,
and the days of tender endearments she had participated with
him. She even dropped a few tears, which the caliph observed;
and inadvertently breathed out with a sigh, “Alas! my gentle
cousin, what will become of thee?” Vathek, at this apostrophe,
knitted up his brows, and Carathis inquired what it could
mean. “She is preposterously sighing after a stripling with
languishing eyes and soft hair, who loves her,” said the caliph.—“Where
is he?” asked Carathis. “I must be acquainted
with this pretty child; for,” added she, lowering her voice, “I
design, before I depart, to regain the favour of the Giaour.
There is nothing so delicious, in his estimation, as the heart
of a delicate boy palpitating with the first tumults of love.”</p>

<p>Vathek, as he came from the bath, commanded Bababalouk
to collect the women and other movables of his harem, embody
his troops, and hold himself in readiness to march within three
days; whilst Carathis retired alone to a tent, where the Giaour
solaced her with encouraging visions: but at length waking, she
found at her feet Nerkes and Cafour, who informed her, by their
signs, that having led Alboufaki to the borders of a lake, to
browse on some grey moss that looked tolerably venomous,
they had discovered certain blue fishes,<a href="#Note_261a" name="Note_122" id="Note_122" class="nanchor">*</a> of the same kind with
those in the reservoir on the top of the tower. “Ah! ha!” said
she, “I will go thither to them. These fish are, past doubt, of a
species that, by a small operation, I can render oracular. They
may tell me where this little Gulchenrouz is, whom I am bent
upon sacrificing.” Having thus spoken, she immediately set
out with her swarthy retinue.</p>

<p>It being but seldom that time is lost in the accomplishment
of a wicked enterprise, Carathis and her negresses soon arrived
at the lake; where, after burning the magical drugs with which
they were always provided, they stripped themselves naked,
and waded to their chins; Nerkes and Cafour waving torches
around them, and Carathis pronouncing her barbarous incantations.
The fishes, with one accord, thrust forth their heads
from the water, which was violently rippled by the flutter of
their fins; and at length finding themselves constrained by
the potency of the charm, they opened their piteous mouths,
and said, “From gills to tail, we are yours; what seek ye to
know?”—“Fishes,” answered she, “I conjure you, by your
glittering scales, tell me where now is Gulchenrouz?”—“Beyond
the rock,” replied the shoal, in full chorus; “will this content
you? for we do not delight in expanding our mouths.”—“It
will,” returned the princess; “I am not to learn that you are
not used to long conversations; I will leave you therefore to
repose, though I had other questions to propound.” The
instant she had spoken, the water became smooth, and the
fishes at once disappeared.</p>

<p>Carathis, inflated with the venom of her projects, strode
hastily over the rock, and found the amiable Gulchenrouz
asleep in an arbour, whilst the two dwarfs were watching at
his side, and ruminating their accustomed prayers. These
diminutive personages possessed the gift of divining whenever
an enemy to good Mussulmans approached; thus they anticipated
the arrival of Carathis, who, stopping short, said to
herself, “How placidly doth he recline his lovely little head!
how pale and languishing are his looks! it is just the very child
of my wishes!” The dwarfs interrupted this delectable soliloquy
by leaping instantly upon her, and scratching her face with their
utmost zeal. But Nerkes and Cafour, betaking themselves to
the succour of their mistress, pinched the dwarfs so severely
in return, that they both gave up the ghost, imploring Mahomet
to inflict his sorest vengeance upon this wicked woman and all
her household.</p>

<p>At the noise which this strange conflict occasioned in the
valley, Gulchenrouz awoke, and, bewildered with terror, sprung
impetuously and climbed an old fig-tree that rose against the
acclivity of the rocks; from thence he gained their summits,
and ran for two hours without once looking back. At last,
exhausted with fatigue, he fell senseless into the arms of a good
old genius, whose fondness for the company of children had
made it his sole occupation to protect them. Whilst performing
his wonted rounds through the air, he had pounced on the
cruel Giaour, at the instant of his growling in the horrible
chasm, and had rescued the fifty little victims which the impiety
of Vathek had devoted to his voracity. These the genius brought
up in nests still higher than the clouds, and himself fixed his
abode in a nest more capacious than the rest, from which he
had expelled the rocs that had built it.</p>

<p>These inviolable asylums were defended against the dives
and the afrits by waving streamers; on which were inscribed
in characters of gold, that flashed like lightning, the names of
Alla and the Prophet.<a href="#Note_262a" name="Note_123" id="Note_123" class="nanchor">*</a> It was there that Gulchenrouz, who
as yet remained undeceived with respect to his pretended death,
thought himself in the mansions of eternal peace. He admitted
without fear the congratulations of his little friends, who were all
assembled in the nest of the venerable genius, and vied with
each other in kissing his serene forehead and beautiful eyelids.
Remote from the inquietudes of the world, the impertinence
of harems, the brutality of eunuchs, and the inconstancy of
women, there he found a place truly congenial to the delights
of his soul. In this peaceable society his days, months, and
years glided on; nor was he less happy than the rest of his companions:
for the genius, instead of burdening his pupils with
perishable riches and vain sciences, conferred upon them the
boon of perpetual childhood.</p>

<p>Carathis, unaccustomed to the loss of her prey, vented a
thousand execrations on her negresses, for not seizing the child,
instead of amusing themselves with pinching to death two
insignificant dwarfs from which they could gain no advantage.
She returned into the valley murmuring; and, finding that her
son was not risen from the arms of Nouronihar, discharged her
ill-humour upon both. The idea, however, of departing next
day for Istakar, and of cultivating, through the good offices
of the Giaour, an intimacy with Eblis himself, at length
consoled her chagrin. But fate had ordained it otherwise.</p>

<p>In the evening, as Carathis was conversing with Dilara,
who through her contrivance had become of the party, and whose
taste resembled her own, Bababalouk came to acquaint her
that the sky towards Samarah looked of a fiery red, and seemed
to portend some alarming disaster. Immediately recurring
to her astrolabes<a href="#Note_263a" name="Note_124" id="Note_124" class="nanchor">*</a> and instruments of magic, she took the altitude
of the planets, and discovered, by her calculations, to her great
mortification, that a formidable revolt had taken place at
Samarah, that Motavakel, availing himself of the disgust
which was inveterate against his brother, had incited commotions
amongst the populace, made himself master of the palace,
and actually invested the great tower, to which Morakanabad
had retired, with a handful of the few that still remained faithful
to Vathek.</p>

<p>“What!” exclaimed she; “must I lose, then, my tower!
my mutes! my negresses! my mummies! and, worse than all,
the laboratory, the favourite resort of my nightly lucubrations,
without knowing, at least, if my hare-brained son will complete
his adventure? No! I will not be the dupe! immediately will I
speed to support Morakanabad. By my formidable art, the
clouds shall pour grape-shot in the faces of the assailants, and
shafts of red-hot iron on their heads. I will let loose my stores
of hungry serpents and torpedoes from beneath them; and we
shall soon see the stand they will make against such an explosion!”</p>

<p>Having thus spoken, Carathis hasted to her son, who was
tranquilly banqueting with Nouronihar in his superb carnation-coloured
tent. “Glutton that thou art!” cried she; “were it
not for me, thou wouldst soon find thyself the mere commander
of savoury pies. Thy faithful subjects have abjured the faith
they swore to thee. Motavakel, thy brother, now reigns on
the hill of Pied Horses, and, had I not some slight resources in
the tower, would not be easily persuaded to abdicate. But,
that time may not be lost, I shall only add a few words: Strike
tent to-night; set forward; and beware how thou loiterest again
by the way. Though thou hast forfeited the conditions of the
parchment, I am not yet without hope; for it cannot be denied
that thou hast violated, to admiration, the laws of hospitality
by seducing the daughter of the emir, after having partaken
of his bread and his salt. Such a conduct cannot but be delightful
to the Giaour; and if, on thy march, thou canst signalize
thyself by an additional crime, all will still go well, and thou
shalt enter the palace of Soliman in triumph. Adieu! Alboufaki
and my negresses are waiting at the door.”</p>

<p>The caliph had nothing to offer in reply: he wished his mother
a prosperous journey, and ate on till he had finished his supper.
At midnight the camp broke up, amidst the flourishing of
trumpets and other martial instruments; but loud indeed
must have been the sound of the timbals, to overpower the
blubbering of the emir and his grey-beards; who, by an excessive
profusion of tears, had so far exhausted the radical moisture,
that their eyes shrivelled up in their sockets, and their hairs
dropped off by the roots. Nouronihar, to whom such a symphony
was painful, did not grieve to get out of hearing. She
accompanied the caliph in the imperial litter, where they
amused themselves with imagining the splendour which was
soon to surround them. The other women, overcome with
dejection, were dolefully rocked in their cages; whilst Dilara
consoled herself with anticipating the joy of celebrating the
rites of fire on the stately terraces of Istakar.</p>

<p>In four days they reached the spacious valley of Rocnabad.
The season of spring was in all its vigour; and the grotesque
branches of the almond trees in full blossom, fantastically
chequered with hyacinths and jonquils, breathed forth a delightful
fragrance. Myriads of bees, and scarce fewer of santons,
had there taken up their abode. On the banks of the stream,
hives and oratories<a href="#Note_264a" name="Note_125" id="Note_125" class="nanchor">*</a> were alternately ranged; and their neatness
and whiteness were set off by the deep green of the cypresses
that spired up amongst them. These pious personages amused
themselves with cultivating little gardens, that abounded with
flowers and fruits; especially musk-melons of the best flavour
that Persia could boast. Sometimes dispersed over the meadow,
they entertained themselves with feeding peacocks whiter than
snow, and turtles more blue than the sapphire. In this manner
were they occupied when the harbingers of the imperial procession
began to proclaim, “Inhabitants of Rocnabad! prostrate
yourselves on the brink of your pure waters; and tender your
thanksgivings to Heaven, that vouchsafeth to show you a ray
of its glory: for, lo! the commander of the faithful draws near.”</p>

<p>The poor santons, filled with holy energy, having bustled to
light up wax torches in their oratories, and expand the Koran
on their ebony desks, went forth to meet the caliph with baskets
of honeycomb, dates, and melons. But, whilst they were
advancing in solemn procession and with measured steps, the
horses, camels, and guards wantoned over their tulips and
other flowers, and made a terrible havoc amongst them. The
santons could not help casting from one eye a look of pity on
the ravages committing around them; whilst the other was
fixed upon the caliph and heaven. Nouronihar, enraptured
with the scenery of a place which brought back to her
remembrance the pleasing solitudes where her infancy had
passed, entreated Vathek to stop: but he, suspecting that these
oratories might be deemed by the Giaour an habitation,
commanded his pioneers to level them all. The santons stood
motionless with horror at the barbarous mandate, and at last
broke out into lamentations; but these were uttered with so
ill a grace, that Vathek bade his eunuchs to kick them from his
presence. He then descended from the litter with Nouronihar.
They sauntered together in the meadow; and amused themselves
with culling flowers, and passing a thousand pleasantries on
each other. But the bees, who were staunch Mussulmans,
thinking it their duty to revenge the insult offered to their
dear masters the santons, assembled so zealously to do it with
good effect, that the caliph and Nouronihar were glad to find
their tents prepared to receive them.</p>

<p>Bababalouk, who, in capacity of purveyor, had acquitted
himself with applause as to peacocks and turtles, lost no time
in consigning some dozens to the spit, and as many more to
be fricasseed. Whilst they were feasting, laughing, carousing,
and blaspheming at pleasure on the banquet so liberally
furnished, the moullahs, the sheiks, the cadis,<a href="#Note_265a" name="Note_126" id="Note_126" class="nanchor">*</a> and imans of
Schiraz (who seemed not to have met the santons) arrived;
leading by bridles of riband, inscribed from the Koran,<a href="#Note_265b" name="Note_127" id="Note_127" class="nanchor">*</a> a train
of asses which were loaded with the choicest fruits the country
could boast. Having presented their offerings to the caliph,
they petitioned him to honour their city and mosques with his
presence. “Fancy not,” said Vathek, “that you can detain me.
Your presence I condescend to accept, but beg you will let me
be quiet, for I am not over-fond of resisting temptation. Retire,
then; yet, as it is not decent for personages so reverend to
return on foot, and as you have not the appearance of expert
riders, my eunuchs shall tie you on your asses, with the precaution
that your backs be not turned towards me; for they
understand etiquette.”—In this deputation were some high-stomached
sheiks, who, taking Vathek for a fool, scrupled not
to speak their opinion. These Bababalouk girded with double
cords; and having well disciplined their asses with nettles
behind, they all started, with a preternatural alertness, plunging,
kicking, and running foul of one another, in the most ludicrous
manner imaginable.</p>

<p>Nouronihar and the caliph mutually contended who should
most enjoy so degrading a sight. They burst out in peals of
laughter to see the old men and their asses fall into the stream.
The leg of one was fractured; the shoulder of another dislocated;
the teeth of a third dashed out; and the rest suffered still worse.</p>

<p>Two days more, undisturbed by fresh embassies, having been
devoted to the pleasures of Rocnabad, the expedition proceeded;
leaving Schiraz on the right, and verging towards a large plain;
from whence were discernible, on the edge of the horizon, the
dark summits of the mountains of Istakar.</p>

<p>At this prospect the caliph and Nouronihar were unable to
repress their transports. They bounded from their litter to the
ground, and broke forth into such wild exclamations, as amazed
all within hearing. Interrogating each other, they shouted,
“Are we not approaching the radiant palace of light? or gardens,
more delightful than those of Sheddad?”—Infatuated mortals!
they thus indulged delusive conjecture, unable to fathom the
decrees of the Most High!</p>

<p>The good genii, who had not totally relinquished the superintendence
of Vathek, repairing to Mahomet in the seventh
heaven, said, “Merciful Prophet! stretch forth thy propitious
arms towards thy vicegerent; who is ready to fall, irretrievably,
into the snare which his enemies, the dives, have prepared to
destroy him. The Giaour is awaiting his arrival, in the abominable
palace of fire; where, if he once set his foot, his perdition
will be inevitable.” Mahomet answered, with an air of indignation,
“He hath too well deserved to be resigned to himself;
but I permit you to try if one effort more will be effectual to
divert him from pursuing his ruin.”</p>

<p>One of these beneficent genii, assuming, without delay, the
exterior of a shepherd, more renowned for his piety than all
the dervishes and santons of the region, took his station near
a flock of white sheep, on the slope of a hill; and began to pour
forth from his flute<a href="#Note_266a" name="Note_128" id="Note_128" class="nanchor">*</a> such airs of pathetic melody, as subdued
the very soul, and, wakening remorse, drove far from it every
frivolous fancy. At these energetic sounds, the sun hid himself
beneath a gloomy cloud; and the waters of two little lakes, that
were naturally clearer than crystal, became of a colour like
blood. The whole of this superb assembly was involuntarily
drawn towards the declivity of the hill.<a href="#Note_266b" name="Note_129" id="Note_129" class="nanchor">*</a>
With downcast eyes,
they all stood abashed; each upbraiding himself with the evil
he had done. The heart of Dilara palpitated; and the chief of
the eunuchs, with a sigh of contrition, implored pardon of
the women, whom, for his own satisfaction, he had so often
tormented.</p>

<p>Vathek and Nouronihar turned pale in their litter; and,
regarding each other with haggard looks, reproached themselves—the
one with a thousand of the blackest crimes, a
thousand projects of impious ambition; the other with the
desolation of her family, and the perdition of the amiable
Gulchenrouz. Nouronihar persuaded herself that she heard, in
the fatal music, the groans of her dying father; and Vathek,
the sobs of the fifty children he had sacrificed to the Giaour.
Amidst these complicated pangs of anguish, they perceived
themselves impelled towards the shepherd, whose countenance
was so commanding that Vathek, for the first time, felt overawed;
whilst Nouronihar concealed her face with her hands.
The music paused; and the genius, addressing the caliph, said,
“Deluded prince! to whom Providence hath confided the care of
innumerable subjects, is it thus that thou fulfillest thy mission?
Thy crimes are already completed; and art thou now listening
towards thy punishment? Thou knowest that, beyond these
mountains, Eblis<a href="#Note_267a" name="Note_130" id="Note_130" class="nanchor">*</a> and his accursed dives hold their infernal
empire; and, seduced by a malignant phantom, thou art proceeding
to surrender thyself to them! This moment is the last
of grace allowed thee: abandon thy atrocious purpose: return:
give back Nouronihar to her father, who still retains a few
sparks of life: destroy thy tower with all its abominations:
drive Carathis from thy councils: be just to thy subjects:
respect the ministers of the Prophet: compensate for thy
impieties by an exemplary life;<a href="#Note_267b" name="Note_131" id="Note_131" class="nanchor">*</a> and, instead of squandering
thy days in voluptuous indulgence, lament thy crimes on the
sepulchres of thy ancestors. Thou beholdest the clouds that
obscure the sun: at the instant he recovers his splendour, if
thy heart be not changed, the time of mercy assigned thee will
be past for ever.”</p>

<p>Vathek, depressed with fear, was on the point of prostrating
himself at the feet of the shepherd, whom he perceived to be
of a nature superior to man: but, his pride prevailing, he
audaciously lifted his head, and, glancing at him one of his
terrible looks, said, “Whoever thou art, withhold thy useless
admonitions: thou wouldst either delude me, or art thyself
deceived. If what I have done be so criminal as thou pretendest,
there remains not for me a moment of grace. I have traversed
a sea of blood to acquire a power which will make thy equals
tremble; deem not that I shall retire when in view of the port,
or that I will relinquish her who is dearer to me than either
my life or thy mercy. Let the sun appear! let him illume my
career! it matters not where it may end.” On uttering these
words, which made even the genius shudder, Vathek threw himself
into the arms of Nouronihar, and commanded that his
horses should be forced back to the road.</p>

<p>There was no difficulty in obeying these orders, for the
attraction had ceased: the sun shone forth in all his glory, and
the shepherd vanished with a lamentable scream.</p>

<p>The fatal impression of the music of the genius remained,
notwithstanding, in the heart of Vathek’s attendants. They
viewed each other with looks of consternation. At the approach
of night almost all of them escaped; and of this numerous
assemblage there only remained the chief of the eunuchs, some
idolatrous slaves, Dilara, and a few other women who, like
herself, were votaries of the religion of the Magi.</p>

<p>The caliph, fired with the ambition of prescribing laws to the
powers of darkness, was but little embarrassed at this dereliction.
The impetuosity of his blood prevented him from sleeping; nor
did he encamp any more as before. Nouronihar, whose
impatience, if possible, exceeded his own, importuned him to
hasten his march, and lavished on him a thousand caresses, to
beguile all reflection. She fancied herself already more potent
than Balkis,<a href="#Note_268a" name="Note_132" id="Note_132" class="nanchor">*</a> and pictured to her imagination the genii falling
prostrate at the foot of her throne. In this manner they
advanced by moonlight till they came within view of the two
towering rocks that form a kind of portal to the valley, at the
extremity of which rose the vast ruins of Istakar. Aloft on
the mountain glimmered the fronts of various royal mausoleums,
the horror of which was deepened by the shadows of night.
They passed through two villages almost deserted, the only
inhabitants remaining being a few feeble old men, who, at the
sight of horses and litters, fell upon their knees, and cried out,
“O Heaven! is it then by these phantoms that we have been
for six months tormented? Alas! it was from the terror of
these spectres, and the noise beneath the mountains, that our
people have fled, and left us at the mercy of the maleficent
spirits!” The caliph, to whom these complaints were but unpromising
auguries, drove over the bodies of these wretched
old men, and at length arrived at the foot of the terrace of
black marble. There he descended from his litter, handing
down Nouronihar. Both with beating hearts stared wildly
around them, and expected, with an apprehensive shudder,
the approach of the Giaour; but nothing as yet announced
his appearance.</p>

<p>A deathlike stillness reigned over the mountain and through
the air; the moon dilated on a vast platform the shades of the
lofty columns, which reached from the terrace almost to the
clouds; the gloomy watch-towers, whose number could not be
counted, were covered by no roof; and their capitals, of an
architecture unknown in the records of the earth, served as an
asylum for the birds of night, which, alarmed at the approach
of such visitants, fled away croaking.</p>

<p>The chief of the eunuchs, trembling with fear, besought
Vathek that a fire might be kindled. “No,” replied he, “there
is no time left to think of such trifles. Abide where thou art,
and expect my commands.” Having thus spoken, he presented
his hand to Nouronihar; and ascending the steps of a vast
staircase, reached the terrace, which was flagged with squares
of marble, and resembled a smooth expanse of water, upon
whose surface not a blade of grass ever dared to vegetate. On
the right rose the watch-towers, ranged before the ruins of an
immense palace, whose walls were embossed with various
figures. In front stood forth the colossal forms of four creatures,
composed of the leopard and the griffin, and though but of
stone, inspired emotions of terror. Near these were distinguished,
by the splendour of the moon, which streamed full on
the place, characters like those on the sabres of the Giaour, and
which possessed the same virtue of changing every moment.
These, after vacillating for some time, fixed at last in Arabic
letters, and prescribed to the caliph the following words:
“Vathek, thou hast violated the conditions of my parchment,
and deservest to be sent back; but in favour to thy companion,
and as the meed for what thou hast done to obtain it, Eblis
permitteth that the portal of his palace shall be opened,
and the subterranean fire will receive thee into the number
of its adorers.”</p>

<p>He scarcely had read these words before the mountain,
against which the terrace was reared, trembled, and the watch-towers
were ready to topple headlong upon them; the rock
yawned, and disclosed within it a staircase of polished marble,
that seemed to approach the abyss. Upon each stair were
planted two large torches, like those Nouronihar had seen in her
vision, the camphorated vapour of which ascended and gathered
itself into a cloud under the hollow of the vault.</p>

<p>This appearance, instead of terrifying, gave new courage to
the daughter of Fakreddin. Scarcely deigning to bid adieu to
the moon and the firmament, she abandoned without hesitation
the pure atmosphere, to plunge into these infernal exhalations.
The gait of those impious personages was haughty and determined.
As they descended, by the effulgence of the torches,
they gazed on each other with mutual admiration, and both
appeared so resplendent that they already esteemed themselves
spiritual intelligences. The only circumstance that perplexed
them was their not arriving at the bottom of the stairs: on
hastening their descent with an ardent impetuosity, they felt
their steps accelerated to such a degree, that they seemed not
walking but falling from a precipice. Their progress, however,
was at length impeded by a vast portal of ebony, which the
caliph without difficulty recognized. Here the Giaour awaited
them with the key in his hand. “Ye are welcome!” said he to
them, with a ghastly smile, “in spite of Mahomet and all his
dependents. I will now usher you into that palace where you
have so highly merited a place.” Whilst he was uttering these
words he touched the enamelled lock with his key, and the
doors at once flew open with a noise still louder than the thunder
of the dog-days, and as suddenly recoiled the moment they
had entered.</p>

<p>The caliph and Nouronihar beheld each other with amazement
at finding themselves in a place which, though roofed
with a vaulted ceiling, was so spacious and lofty, that at first
they took it for an immeasurable plain. But their eyes at length
growing familiar to the grandeur of the surrounding objects,
they extended their view to those at a distance, and discovered
rows of columns and arcades, which gradually diminished, till
they terminated in a point radiant as the sun when he darts his
last beams athwart the ocean. The pavement, strewed over
with gold dust and saffron,<a href="#Note_270a" name="Note_133" id="Note_133" class="nanchor">*</a> exhaled so subtle an odour as almost
overpowered them. They, however, went on, and observed
an infinity of censers, in which ambergris and the wood of
aloes were continually burning. Between the several columns
were placed tables, each spread with a profusion of viands,
and wines of every species sparkling in vases of crystal. A
throng of genii and other fantastic spirits of either sex danced
lasciviously at the sound of music which issued from beneath.</p>

<p>In the midst of this immense hall, a vast multitude was incessantly
passing, who severally kept their right hands on their
hearts, without once regarding anything around them: they
had all the livid paleness of death. Their eyes, deep sunk in
their sockets, resembled those phosphoric meteors that glimmer
by night in places of interment. Some stalked slowly on,
absorbed in profound reverie; some, shrieking with agony, ran
furiously about like tigers wounded with poisoned arrows;
whilst others, grinding their teeth in rage, foamed along more
frantic than the wildest maniac. They all avoided each other;
and, though surrounded by a multitude that no one could
number, each wandered at random unheedful of the rest, as
if alone on a desert where no foot had trodden.</p>

<p>Vathek and Nouronihar, frozen with terror at a sight so
baleful, demanded of the Giaour what these appearances might
mean, and why these ambulating spectres never withdrew their
hands from their hearts? “Perplex not yourselves with so
much at once,” replied he bluntly; “you will soon be acquainted
with all: let us haste and present you to Eblis.” They continued
their way through the multitude: but, notwithstanding
their confidence at first, they were not sufficiently composed
to examine with attention the various perspectives of halls and
of galleries that opened on the right hand and left; which were
all illuminated by torches and braziers, whose flames rose in
pyramids to the centre of the vault. At length they came to
a place where long curtains, brocaded with crimson and gold,
fell from all parts in solemn confusion. Here the choirs and
dances were heard no longer. The light which glimmered
came from afar.</p>

<p>After some time, Vathek and Nouronihar perceived a gleam
brightening through the drapery, and entered a vast tabernacle
hung round with the skins of leopards. An infinity of elders
with streaming beards, and afrits in complete armour, had
prostrated themselves before the ascent of a lofty eminence;
on the top of which, upon a globe of fire, sat the formidable
Eblis. His person was that of a young man, whose noble and
regular features seemed to have been tarnished by malignant
vapours. In his large eyes appeared both pride and despair:
his flowing hair retained some resemblance to that of an angel
of light. In his hand, which thunder had blasted, he swayed
the iron sceptre that causes the monster Ouranbad,<a href="#Note_271a" name="Note_134" id="Note_134" class="nanchor">*</a> the afrits,
and all the powers of the abyss to tremble. At his presence,
the heart of the caliph sunk within him; and he fell prostrate
on his face. Nouronihar, however, though greatly dismayed,
could not help admiring the person of Eblis; for she expected
to have seen some stupendous giant. Eblis, with a voice more
mild than might be imagined, but such as penetrated the soul
and filled it with the deepest melancholy, said, “Creatures of
clay,<a href="#Note_272a" name="Note_135" id="Note_135" class="nanchor">*</a> I receive you into mine empire: ye are numbered amongst
my adorers: enjoy whatever this palace affords: the treasures
of the pre-Adamite sultans, their fulminating sabres, and those
talismans that compel the dives to open the subterranean
expanses of the mountain of Kaf, which communicate with these.
There, insatiable as your curiosity may be, shall you find
sufficient objects to gratify it. You shall possess the exclusive
privilege of entering the fortresses of Aherman,<a href="#Note_272b" name="Note_136" id="Note_136" class="nanchor">*</a> and the halls
of Argenk,<a href="#Note_272c" name="Note_137" id="Note_137" class="nanchor">*</a> where are portrayed all creatures endowed with
intelligence; and the various animals that inhabited the earth
prior to the creation of that contemptible being whom ye
denominate the father of mankind.”</p>

<p>Vathek and Nouronihar, feeling themselves revived and
encouraged by this harangue, eagerly said to the Giaour,
“Bring us instantly to the place which contains these precious
talismans.”—“Come,” answered this wicked dive, with his
malignant grin—“come and possess all that my sovereign hath
promised, and more.” He then conducted them into a long
aisle adjoining the tabernacle; preceding them with hasty
steps, and followed by his disciples with the utmost alacrity.
They reached, at length, a hall of great extent, and covered
with a lofty dome; around which appeared fifty portals of bronze,
secured with as many fastenings of iron. A funereal gloom
prevailed over the whole scene. Here, upon two beds of incorruptible
cedar, lay recumbent the fleshless forms of the pre-Adamite
kings, who had been monarchs of the whole earth.
They still possessed enough of life to be conscious of their
deplorable condition. Their eyes retained a melancholy motion;
they regarded one another with looks of the deepest dejection,
each holding his right hand, motionless, on his heart.<a href="#Note_272d" name="Note_138" id="Note_138" class="nanchor">*</a> At their
feet were inscribed the events of their several reigns, their
power, their pride, and their crimes; Soliman Raad, Soliman
Daki, and Soliman, called Gian Ben Gian, who, after having
chained up the dives in the dark caverns of Kaf, became so
presumptuous as to doubt of the Supreme Power. All these
maintained great state, though not to be compared with the
eminence of Soliman Ben Daoud.</p>

<p>This king, so renowned for his wisdom, was on the loftiest
elevation, and placed immediately under the dome. He
appeared to possess more animation than the rest. Though,
from time to time, he laboured with profound sighs; and, like
his companions, kept his right hand on his heart, yet his countenance
was more composed, and he seemed to be listening to
the sullen roar of a cataract visible in part through one of the
grated portals. This was the only sound that intruded on
the silence of these doleful mansions. A range of brazen cases
surrounded the elevation. “Remove the covers from these
cabalistic depositories,” said the Giaour to Vathek, “and avail
thyself of the talismans which will break asunder all these
gates of bronze, and not only render thee master of the treasures
contained within them, but also of the spirits by which they
are guarded.”</p>

<p>The caliph, whom this ominous preliminary had entirely
disconcerted, approached the vase with faltering footsteps;
and was ready to sink with terror when he heard the groans
of Soliman. As he proceeded, a voice from the livid lips of
the prophet articulated these words: “In my lifetime I filled<a href="#Note_273a" name="Note_139" id="Note_139" class="nanchor">*</a>
a magnificent throne; having, on my right hand, twelve thousand
seats of gold, where the patriarchs and the prophets heard
my doctrines: on my left, the sages and doctors, upon as many
thrones of silver, were present at all my decisions. Whilst I
thus administered justice to innumerable multitudes, the birds
of the air, hovering over me, served as a canopy against the
rays of the sun. My people flourished; and my palace rose to
the clouds. I erected a temple to the Most High, which was
the wonder of the universe; but I basely suffered myself to be
seduced by the love of women, and a curiosity that could not
be restrained by sublunary things. I listened to the counsels
of Aherman and the daughter of Pharaoh; and adored fire
and the hosts of heaven. I forsook the holy city, and commanded
the genii to rear the stupendous palace of Istakar, and
the terrace of the watch-towers; each of which was consecrated
to a star. There, for a while, I enjoyed myself in the zenith
of glory and pleasure. Not only men but supernatural beings
were subject also to my will. I began to think, as these unhappy
monarchs around had already thought, that the vengeance of
Heaven was asleep; when, at once, the thunder burst my structures
asunder, and precipitated me hither: where, however, I
do not remain, like the other inhabitants, totally destitute of
hope; for an angel of light hath revealed that in consideration of
the piety of my early youth my woes shall come to an end,
when this cataract shall for ever cease to flow. Till then
I am in torments, ineffable torments! an unrelenting fire preys
on my heart.”<a href="#Note_274a" name="Note_140" id="Note_140" class="nanchor">*</a></p>

<p>Having uttered this exclamation, Soliman raised his hands
towards heaven, in token of supplication; and the caliph
discerned through his bosom, which was transparent as crystal,
his heart enveloped in flames. At a sight so full of horror,
Nouronihar fell back, like one petrified, into the arms of Vathek,
who cried out with a convulsive sob, “O Giaour! whither hast
thou brought us! Allow us to depart, and I will relinquish
all thou hast promised. O Mahomet! remains there no more
mercy?”—“None! none!” replied the malicious dive. “Know,
miserable prince! thou art now in the abode of vengeance and
despair. Thy heart, also, will be kindled like those of the other
votaries of Eblis. A few days are allotted thee previous to this
fatal period: employ them as thou wilt; recline on these heaps
of gold; command the infernal potentates; range, at thy pleasure,
through these immense subterranean domains: no barrier shall
be shut against thee. As for me, I have fulfilled my mission:
I now leave thee to thyself.” At these words he vanished.</p>

<p>The caliph and Nouronihar remained in the most abject
affliction. Their tears were unable to flow, and scarcely could
they support themselves. At length, taking each other despondingly
by the hand, they went faltering from this fatal
hall, indifferent which way they turned their steps. Every
portal opened at their approach. The dives fell prostrate
before them. Every reservoir of riches was disclosed to their
view; but they no longer felt the incentives of curiosity, of
pride, or avarice. With like apathy they heard the chorus of
genii, and saw the stately banquets prepared to regale them.
They went wandering on, from chamber to chamber, hall to
hall, and gallery to gallery; all without bounds or limit; all
distinguishable by the same lowering gloom; all adorned with
the same awful grandeur; all traversed by persons in search of
repose and consolation, but who sought them in vain; for every
one carried within him a heart tormented in flames. Shunned
by these various sufferers, who seemed by their looks to be
upbraiding the partners of their guilt, they withdrew from
them to wait, in direful suspense, the moment which should
render them to each other the like objects of terror.</p>

<p>“What!” exclaimed Nouronihar; “will the time come when
I shall snatch my hand from thine?”—“Ah!” said Vathek,
“and shall my eyes ever cease to drink from thine long draughts
of enjoyment? Shall the moments of our reciprocal ecstasies
be reflected on with horror? It was not thou that broughtest
me hither; the principles by which Carathis perverted my
youth have been the sole cause of my perdition! it is but right
she should have her share of it.” Having given vent to these
painful expressions, he called to an afrit, who was stirring up
one of the braziers, and bade him fetch the Princess Carathis
from the palace of Samarah.</p>

<p>After issuing these orders, the caliph and Nouronihar continued
walking amidst the silent crowd, till they heard voices
at the end of the gallery. Presuming them to proceed from
some unhappy beings, who, like themselves, were awaiting their
final doom, they followed the sound, and found it to come from
a small square chamber, where they discovered, sitting on sofas,
four young men of goodly figure, and a lovely female, who
were holding a melancholy conversation by the glimmering of
a lonely lamp. Each had a gloomy and forlorn air; and two
of them were embracing each other with great tenderness. On
seeing the caliph and the daughter of Fakreddin enter, they
arose, saluted, and made room for them. Then he who appeared
the most considerable of the group, addressed himself thus to
Vathek: “Strangers! who doubtless are in the same state of
suspense with ourselves, as you do not yet bear your hand on
your heart, if you come hither to pass the interval allotted,
previous to the infliction of our common punishment, condescend
to relate the adventures that have brought you to this fatal
place; and we, in return, will acquaint you with ours, which
deserve but too well to be heard. To trace back our crimes
to their source, though we are not permitted to repent, is the
only employment suited to wretches like us!”</p>

<p>The caliph and Nouronihar assented to the proposal; and
Vathek began, not without tears and lamentations, a sincere
recital of every circumstance that had passed. When the
afflicting narrative was closed, the young man entered on his
own. Each person proceeded in order; and, when the third
prince had reached the midst of his adventures, a sudden noise
interrupted him, which caused the vault to tremble and to open.</p>

<p>Immediately a cloud descended, which, gradually dissipating,
discovered Carathis on the back of an afrit,<a href="#Note_275a" name="Note_141" id="Note_141" class="nanchor">*</a> who grievously
complained of his burden. She, instantly springing to the
ground, advanced towards her son, and said, “What dost thou
here, in this little square chamber? As the dives are become
subject to thy beck, I expected to have found thee on the
throne of the pre-Adamite kings.”</p>

<p>
“Execrable woman!” answered the caliph; “cursed be the
day thou gavest me birth! Go, follow this afrit; let him conduct
thee to the hall of the prophet Soliman: there thou wilt learn
to what these palaces are destined, and how much I ought to
abhor the impious knowledge thou hast taught me.”</p>

<p>“Has the height of power, to which thou art arrived, turned
thy brain?” answered Carathis; “but I ask no more than
permission to show my respect for Soliman the prophet. It
is, however, proper thou shouldst know that (as the afrit has
informed me neither of us shall return to Samarah) I requested
his permission to arrange my affairs, and he politely consented.
Availing myself, therefore, of the few moments allowed me, I
set fire to the tower, and consumed in it the mutes, negresses,
and serpents, which have rendered me so much good service;
nor should I have been less kind to Morakanabad, had he not
prevented me, by deserting at last to thy brother. As for
Bababalouk, who had the folly to return to Samarah, to provide
husbands for thy wives, I undoubtedly would have put him to
the torture; but being in a hurry, I only hung him, after having
decoyed him in a snare, with thy wives, whom I buried alive by
the help of my negresses, who thus spent their last moments
greatly to their satisfaction. With respect to Dilara, who ever
stood high in my favour, she hath evinced the greatness of her
mind, by fixing herself near, in the service of one of the magi;
and, I think, will soon be one of our society.”</p>

<p>Vathek, too much cast down to express the indignation excited
by such a discourse, ordered the afrit to remove Carathis from
his presence, and continued immersed in thoughts which his
companions durst not disturb.</p>

<p>Carathis, however, eagerly entered the dome of Soliman, and
without regarding in the least the groans of the prophet, undauntedly
removed the covers of the vases and violently seized
on the talismans. Then, with a voice more loud than had hitherto
been heard within these mansions, she compelled the dives
to disclose to her the most secret treasures, the most profound
stores, which the afrit himself had not seen. She passed, by
rapid descents, known only to Eblis and his most favoured
potentates; and thus penetrated the very entrails of the earth,
where breathes the sansar, or the icy wind of death. Nothing
appalled her dauntless soul. She perceived, however, in all the
inmates who bore their hands on their heart, a little singularity
not much to her taste.</p>

<p>As she was emerging from one of the abysses, Eblis stood
forth to her view; but notwithstanding he displayed the full
effulgence of his infernal majesty, she preserved her countenance
unaltered, and even paid her compliments with considerable
firmness.</p>

<p>This superb monarch thus answered: “Princess, whose
knowledge and whose crimes have merited a conspicuous rank
in my empire, thou dost well to avail thyself of the leisure
that remains; for the flames and torments, which are ready
to seize on thy heart, will not fail to provide thee soon with
full employment.” He said, and was lost in the curtains of
his tabernacle.</p>

<p>Carathis paused for a moment with surprise; but, resolved
to follow the advice of Eblis, she assembled all the choirs of
genii, and all the dives, to pay her homage. Thus marched
she, in triumph, through a vapour of perfumes, amidst the
acclamations of all the malignant spirits, with most of whom
she had formed a previous acquaintance. She even attempted
to dethrone one of the Solimans, for the purpose of usurping
his place; when a voice, proceeding from the abyss of death,
proclaimed, “All is accomplished!” Instantaneously the haughty
forehead of the intrepid princess became corrugated with agony;
she uttered a tremendous yell, and fixed, no more to be withdrawn,
her right hand upon her heart, which was become a
receptacle of eternal fire.</p>

<p>In this delirium, forgetting all ambitious projects, and her
thirst for that knowledge which should ever be hidden from
mortals, she overturned the offerings of the genii; and, having
execrated the hour she was begotten and the womb that had
borne her, glanced off in a rapid whirl that rendered her
invisible,<a href="#Note_277a" name="Note_142" id="Note_142" class="nanchor">*</a> and continued to revolve without intermission.</p>

<p>Almost at the same instant, the same voice announced to
the caliph, Nouronihar, the four princes, and the princess, the
awful and irrevocable decree. Their hearts immediately took
fire, and they, at once, lost the most precious gift of heaven—<span class="ucsmcap">HOPE</span>.
These unhappy beings recoiled, with looks of the most
furious distraction. Vathek beheld in the eyes of Nouronihar
nothing but rage and vengeance; nor could she discern aught
in his but aversion and despair. The two princes who were
friends, and, till that moment, had preserved their attachment,
shrunk back, gnashing their teeth with mutual and unchangeable
hatred. Kahlah and his sister made reciprocal gestures of
imprecation; all testified their horror for each other by the most
ghastly convulsions, and screams that could not be smothered.
All severally plunged themselves into the accursed multitude,
there to wander in an eternity of unabating anguish.</p>

<p>Such was, and such should be, the punishment of unrestrained
passions and atrocious deeds! Such shall be the chastisement
of that blind curiosity, which would transgress those bounds
the wisdom of the Creator has prescribed to human knowledge;
and such the dreadful disappointment of that restless ambition,
which, aiming at discoveries reserved for beings of a supernatural
order, perceives not, through its infatuated pride, that
the condition of man upon earth is to be—humble and ignorant.</p>

<p>Thus the caliph Vathek, who, for the sake of empty pomp
and forbidden power, had sullied himself with a thousand
crimes, became a prey to grief without end, and remorse without
mitigation; whilst the humble, the despised Gulchenrouz
passed whole ages in undisturbed tranquillity, and in the pure
happiness of childhood.</p>

<p></p>

<h3><a name="NOTES" id="NOTES"></a>
NOTES</h3>


<h4><a href="#Note_1" name="Note_195a" id="Note_195a">
<span class="smcap">Page 195.</span></a> <i>Caliph</i></h4>

<p>This title, amongst the Mahometans, comprehends the concrete
character of Prophet, Priest, and King, and is used to signify <i>the
Vicar of God on Earth</i>. It is, at this day, one of the titles of the
Grand Signior, as successor of Mahomet; and of the Sophi of Persia,
as successor of Ali.—<span class="smcap">Habesci’s</span> <i>State of the Ottoman Empire</i>, p. 9.
<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 985.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_2" name="Note_195b" id="Note_195b">
<span class="smcap">Page 195.</span></a> <i>Omar Ben Abdalaziz</i></h4>

<p>This caliph was eminent above all others for temperance and
self-denial, insomuch that he is believed to have been raised to
Mahomet’s bosom, as a reward for his abstinence in an age of
corruption.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 690.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_3" name="Note_195c" id="Note_195c">
<span class="smcap">Page 195.</span></a> <i>Samarah</i></h4>

<p>A city of the Babylonian Irak; supposed to have stood on the site
where Nimrod erected his tower. Khondemir relates, in his life
of Motassem, that this prince, to terminate the disputes which were
perpetually happening between the inhabitants of Bagdat and his
Turkish slaves, withdrew from thence, and having fixed on a
situation in the plain of Catoul, there founded Samarah. He is
said to have had, in the stables of this city, a hundred and thirty
thousand <i>pied horses</i>, each of which carried, by his order, a sack
of earth to a place he had chosen. By this accumulation an elevation
was formed that commanded a view of all Samarah, and served
for the foundation of his magnificent palace.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, pp. 752,
808, 985. <i>Anecdotes Arabes</i>, p. 413.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_4" name="Note_195d" id="Note_195d">
<span class="smcap">Page 195.</span></a> <i>... in the most delightful succession</i></h4>

<p>The great men of the East have been always fond of music.
Though forbidden by the Mahometan religion, it commonly makes
a part of every entertainment. <i>Nitimur in vetitum semper.</i> Female
slaves are generally kept to amuse them and the ladies of their
harems. The Persian Khanyagere seems nearly to have resembled
our old English minstrel; as he usually accompanied his barbut,
or lute, with heroic songs.—<span class="smcap">Richardson’s</span> <i>Dissertation on the
Languages, etc., of Eastern Nations</i>, p. 211.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_5" name="Note_196a" id="Note_196a">
<span class="smcap">Page 196.</span></a> <i>Mani</i></h4>

<p>This artist, whom Inatulla of Delhi styles <i>the far-famed</i>, lived in the
reign of Schabur, or Sapor, the son of Ardschir Babegan, was founder
of the sect of Manichæans, and was, by profession, a painter and
sculptor. His pretensions, supported by an uncommon skill in
mechanical contrivances, induced the ignorant to believe that his
powers were more than human. After having secluded himself
from his followers, under the pretence of passing a year in heaven,
he produced a wonderful volume, which he affirmed to have brought
from thence; containing images and figures of a marvellous nature.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>,
p. 458. It appears, from the <i>Arabian Nights</i>,
that Haroun al Raschid, Vathek’s grandfather, had adorned his
palace and furnished his magnificent pavilion with the most capital
performances of the Persian artists.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_6" name="Note_196b" id="Note_196b">
<span class="smcap">Page 196.</span></a> <i>Houris</i></h4>

<p>The virgins of Paradise, called, from their large black eyes,
<i>Hur al oyun</i>. An intercourse with these, according to the institution
of Mahomet, is to constitute the principal felicity of the faithful.
Not formed of clay, like mortal women, they are deemed in the
highest degree beautiful, and exempt from every inconvenience
incident to the sex.—<i>Al Koran</i>; <i>passim</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_7" name="Note_196c" id="Note_196c">
<span class="smcap">Page 196.</span></a> <i>... it was not with the orthodox that he usually held</i></h4>

<p>Vathek persecuted, with extreme rigour, all who defended the
eternity of the Koran; which the Sonnites, or orthodox, maintained
to be uncreated, and the Motazalites and Schiites as strenuously
denied.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 85, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_8" name="Note_197a" id="Note_197a">
<span class="smcap">Page 197.</span></a> <i>Mahomet in the seventh heaven</i></h4>

<p>In this heaven, the paradise of Mahomet is supposed to be placed,
contiguous to the throne of Alla. Hagi Khalfah relates, that Ben
Iatmaiah, a celebrated doctor of Damascus, had the temerity to
assert that, when the Most High erected his throne, he reserved a
vacant place for Mahomet upon it.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_9" name="Note_197b" id="Note_197b">
<span class="smcap">Page 197.</span></a> <i>Genii</i></h4>

<p><i>Genn</i>, or <i>Ginn</i>, in the Arabic, signifies a Genius or Demon, a being
of a higher order, and formed of more subtile matter than man.
According to Oriental mythology, the Genii governed the world
long before the creation of Adam. The Mahometans regarded
them as an intermediate race between angels and men, and capable
of salvation; whence Mahomet pretended a commission to convert
them. Consonant to this, we read that, <i>when the</i> Servant of God
<i>stood up to invoke him, it wanted little but that the</i> Genii <i>had pressed on
him in crowds, to hear him rehearse the Koran</i>.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 375.
<i>Al Koran</i>, ch. 72. It is asserted, and not without plausible reasons,
that the words <i>Genn</i>, <i>Ginn</i>—<i>Genius</i>, <i>Genie</i>, <i>Gian</i>, <i>Gigas</i>, <i>Giant</i>,
<i>Géant</i>—proceed from the same themes, viz. <ins class="grk" title="Gê">Γὴ</ins>,
<i>the earth</i>, and <ins class="grk" title="gaô">γάω</ins>, <i>to
produce</i>; as if these supernatural agents had been an early production
of the earth, long before Adam was modelled out from a
lump of it. The <ins class="grk" title="Ôntes">Ωντες</ins> and
<ins class="grk" title="Eôntes">Εωντες</ins> of Plato bear a close analogy to
these supposed intermediate creatures between God and man.
From these premises arose the consequence that, boasting a higher
order, formed of more subtle matter, and possessed of much greater
knowledge, than man, they lorded over this planet, and invisibly
governed it with superior intellect. From this last circumstance
they obtained in Greece the title of <ins class="grk" title="Daimones">Δαίμονες</ins>,
Demons, from <ins class="grk" title="daêmôn">δαήμων</ins>,
<i>sciens</i>, knowing. The Hebrew word, <ins class="hbw" title="NFLIM">נפלים</ins>, Nephilim (Gen. vi, 4),
translated by <i>Gigantes</i>, giants, claiming the same etymon with
<ins class="grk" title="nephelê">νεφέλη</ins>, a cloud, seems also to indicate that these intellectual beings
inhabited the void expanse of the terrestrial atmosphere. Hence
the very ancient fable of men of enormous strength and size revolting
against the gods, and all the mythological lore relating to that
mighty conflict; unless we trace the origin of this important event
to the ambition of Satan, his revolt against the Almighty, and his
fall with the angels.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_10" name="Note_197c" id="Note_197c">
<span class="smcap">Page 197.</span></a> <i>Assist him to complete the tower</i></h4>

<p>The Genii, who were styled by the Persians <i>Peris</i> and <i>Dives</i>, were
famous for their architectural skill. The pyramids of Egypt have
been ascribed to them.</p>

<p>The Koran relates, that the Genii were employed by Solomon in
the erection of his magnificent temple.—<span class="smcap">Bailly</span>, <i>Sur l’Atlantide</i>,
p. 146. <span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 8. <i>Al Koran</i>, ch. 34.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_11" name="Note_198a" id="Note_198a">
<span class="smcap">Page 198.</span></a> <i>... the stranger displayed such rarities as he had
never before seen</i></h4>

<p>In the <i>Tales of Inatulla</i>, we meet with a traveller who, like this,
was furnished with trinkets and curiosities of an extraordinary kind.
That such were much sought after in the days of Vathek, may be
concluded from the encouragement which Haroun al Raschid gave
to the mechanic arts, and the present he sent by his ambassadors
to Charlemagne. This consisted of a clock, which, when put into
motion, by means of a clepsydra, not only pointed out the hours
in their round, but also, by dropping small balls on a bell, struck
them, and, at the same instant, threw open as many little doors,
to let out an equal number of horsemen. Besides these, the clock
displayed various other contrivances.—<i>Ann. Reg. Franc. Pip.
Caroli, etc.</i>, <i>ad ann.</i> 807. <span class="smcap">Weidler</span>, p. 205.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_12" name="Note_198b" id="Note_198b">
<span class="smcap">Page 198.</span></a> <i>... characters on the sabres</i></h4>

<p>Such inscriptions often occur in Eastern romances. We find, in
the <i>Arabian Nights</i>, a cornelian, on which <i>unknown characters</i> were
engraven; and, also, a sabre, like those here described. In the
French king’s library is a curious treatise, entitled <i>Sefat Alaclam</i>;
containing a variety of alphabets, arranged under different heads;
such as the <i>prophetic</i>, the <i>mystical</i>, the <i>philosophic</i>, the <i>magical</i>,
the <i>talismanic</i>, etc., which seems to have escaped the research of
the indefatigable Mr. Astle.—<i>Arabian Nights</i>, vol. ii, p. 246; vol. i,
p. 143. <span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 797.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_13" name="Note_201a" id="Note_201a">
<span class="smcap">Page 201.</span></a> <i>... beards burnt off</i></h4>

<p>The loss of the beard, from the earliest ages, was accounted highly
disgraceful. An instance occurs, in the <i>Tales of Inatulla</i>, of one
being <i>singed off</i>, as a mulct on the owner, for having failed to explain
a question propounded; and, in the <i>Arabian Nights</i>, a proclamation
may be seen similar to this of Vathek.—Vol. i, p. 268; vol. ii, p. 228.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_14" name="Note_202a" id="Note_202a">
<span class="smcap">Page 202.</span></a> <i>The old man put on his green spectacles</i></h4>

<p>This is an apparent anachronism; but such frequently occur in
reading the Arabian writers. It should be remembered, the difficulty
of ascertaining facts and fixing the dates of inventions must
be considerable in a vast extent of country, where books are comparatively
few, and the art of printing unpractised. Though the
origin of <i>spectacles</i> can be traced back, with certainty, no higher
than the thirteenth century, yet the observation of Seneca—that
letters appeared of an increased magnitude when viewed through
the medium of convex glass—might have been noted also by others,
and <i>a sort of spectacles</i> contrived, in consequence of it. But, however
this might have been, the art of staining glass is sufficiently
ancient, to have suggested in the days of Vathek the use of <i>green</i>,
as a protection to the eye from a glare of light.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_15" name="Note_204a" id="Note_204a">
<span class="smcap">Page 204.</span></a> <i>Accursed Giaour!</i></h4>

<p><i>Dives</i> of this kind are frequently mentioned by Eastern writers.
Consult their tales in general; and especially those of the Fishermen,
Aladdin, and the Princess of China.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_16" name="Note_206a" id="Note_206a">
<span class="smcap">Page 206.</span></a> <i>Bababalouk, the chief of his eunuchs</i></h4>

<p>As it was the employment of the <i>black eunuchs</i> to wait upon and
guard the sultanas; so the general superintendence of the harem was
particularly committed to their chief.—<span class="smcap">Habesci’s</span> <i>State of the Ottoman
Empire</i>, pp. 155, 156.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_17" name="Note_206b" id="Note_206b">
<span class="smcap">Page 206.</span></a> <i>... the divan</i></h4>

<p>This was both the supreme council and court of justice, at which
the caliphs of the race of the Abassides assisted in person, to redress
the injuries of every appellant.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 298.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_18" name="Note_206c" id="Note_206c">
<span class="smcap">Page 206.</span></a> <i>The officers arranged themselves in a semicircle</i></h4>

<p>Such was the etiquette, constantly observed, on entering the
divan.—<i>Arabian Nights</i>, vol. iv, p. 36. <span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 912.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_19" name="Note_206d" id="Note_206d">
<span class="smcap">Page 206.</span></a> <i>... the prime vizier</i></h4>

<p>Vazir, vezir, or, as we express it, vizier, literally signifies a <i>porter</i>;
and, by metaphor, the minister who bears the principal burden of
the state, generally called the Sublime Porte.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_20" name="Note_207a" id="Note_207a">
<span class="smcap">Page 207.</span></a> <i>The muezzins and their minarets</i></h4>

<p>Valid, the son of Abdalmalek, was the first who erected a <i>minaret</i>,
or turret; and this he placed on the grand mosque at Damascus,
for the <i>muezzin</i>, or crier, to announce from it the hour of prayer.
This practice has constantly been kept to this day.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>,
p. 576.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_21" name="Note_210a" id="Note_210a">
<span class="smcap">Page 210.</span></a> <i>Soliman Ben Daoud</i></h4>

<p>The name of <i>David</i> in Hebrew is composed of the letter
<ins class="hbw" title="V">ו</ins> <i>Vau</i>
between two <ins class="hbw" title="D">ד</ins> <i>Daleths</i>
<ins class="hbw" title="DVD">דוד</ins>; and, according to the Masoretic points,
ought to be pronounced <i>David</i>. Having no <span class="ucsmcap">U</span> consonant in their
tongue, the Septuagint substituted the letter <span class="ucsmcap">B</span> for <span class="ucsmcap">V</span>, and wrote
<ins class="grk" title="Dabid">Δαβιδ</ins>, <i>Dabid</i>. The Syriac reads <i>Dad</i> or <i>Dod</i>; and the Arabs
articulate <i>Daoud</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_22" name="Note_210b" id="Note_210b">
<span class="smcap">Page 210.</span></a> <i>I require the blood of fifty of the most beautiful sons of
the viziers</i></h4>

<p>Amongst the infatuated votaries of the powers of darkness, the
most acceptable offering was <i>the blood of their children</i>. If the
parents were not at hand to make an immediate offer, <i>the magistrates
did not fail to select those who were most fair and promising</i>, that the
demon might not be defrauded of his dues. On one occasion,
<i>two hundred of the prime nobility were sacrificed together</i>.—<span class="smcap">Bryant’s</span>
<i>Observations</i>, p. 279, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_23" name="Note_213a" id="Note_213a">
<span class="smcap">Page 213.</span></a> <i>... bracelet</i></h4>

<p>The bracelet, in the East, was an emblem of royalty.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>,
p. 541. For want of a more proper term to denominate the
ornament <i>serkhooj</i>, the word <i>aigret</i> is here used.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_24" name="Note_214a" id="Note_214a">
<span class="smcap">Page 214.</span></a> <i>... mutes</i></h4>

<p>It has been usual, in Eastern courts, from time immemorial, to
retain a number of mutes. These are not only employed to amuse
the monarch, but also to instruct his pages in an art to us little
known, of communicating everything by signs, lest the sounds of
their voices should disturb the sovereign.—<span class="smcap">Habesci’s</span> <i>State of the
Ottoman Empire</i>, p. 164. The mutes are also the secret instruments
of his private vengeance, in carrying the fatal string.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_25" name="Note_215a" id="Note_215a">
<span class="smcap">Page 215.</span></a> <i>Prayer announced at break of day</i></h4>

<p>The stated seasons of public prayer, in the twenty-four hours,
were five: daybreak, noon, midtime between noon and sunset,
immediately as the sun leaves the horizon, and an hour and a half
after it is down.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_26" name="Note_216a" id="Note_216a">
<span class="smcap">Page 216.</span></a> <i>Skulls and skeletons</i></h4>

<p>Both were usually added to the ingredients already mentioned.
These magic rites sufficiently resemble the witch scenes of Middleton,
Shakespeare, etc., to show their Oriental origin. Nor is it to
be wondered if, amongst the many systems adopted from the East,
this should have been in the number. It may be seen, from the
Arabian Tales, that magic was an art publicly taught; and Father
Angelo relates of a rich enchanter, whom he knew at Bassora, that
his pupils were so numerous as to occupy an entire quarter of
the city.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_27" name="Note_219a" id="Note_219a">
<span class="smcap">Page 219.</span></a> <i>Flagons of wine and vases of sherbet reposing on
snow</i></h4>

<p>Sir John Chardin speaks of a wine much admired in the East, and
particularly in Persia, called <i>roubnar</i>; which is made from the juice
of the pomegranate, and sent abroad in large quantities. The
Oriental sherbets, styled by St. Jerome, <i>sorbitiunculæ delicatæ</i>,
consisted of various syrups (such as lemon, liquorice, capillaire, etc.)
mixed with water. To these, Hasselquist adds several others, and
observes, that the sweet-scented violet is a flower greatly esteemed,
not only for its smell and colour, but, especially, for its use in
<i>sherbet</i>; which, when the Easterns intend to entertain their guests
in an elegant manner, is made of a solution of violet-sugar. Snow,
in the <i>rinfrescos</i> of a hot climate, is almost a constant ingredient.
Thus, in the <i>Arabian Nights</i>, Bedreddin Hassan, having filled a
large porcelain bowl with sherbet of roses, put snow into it.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_28" name="Note_219b" id="Note_219b">
<span class="smcap">Page 219.</span></a> <i>... a parchment</i></h4>

<p>Parchments of the like mysterious import are frequent in the
writings of the Easterns. One in particular, amongst the Arabians,
is held in high veneration. It was written by Ali, and Giafar
Sadek, in mystic characters, and is said to contain the destiny of
the Mahometan religion, and the great events which are to happen
previous to the end of the world. This parchment is of <i>camel’s
skin</i>; but it was usual with Catherine of Medicis to carry about
her person, a legend, in cabalistic characters, inscribed on the skin
of a dead-born infant.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 366. <span class="smcap">Wraxall’s</span> <i>House
of Valois</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_29" name="Note_219c" id="Note_219c">
<span class="smcap">Page 219.</span></a> <i>Istakar</i></h4>

<p>This city was the ancient Persepolis, and capital of Persia, under
the kings of the three first races. The author of <i>Lebtarikh</i> writes,
that Kischtab there established his abode, erected several temples
to the element of fire, and hewed out for himself and his successors
sepulchres in the rocks of the mountain contiguous to the city.
The ruins of columns and broken figures which still remain, defaced
as they were by Alexander and mutilated by time, plainly evince
that those ancient potentates had chosen it for the place of their
interment. Their monuments, however, must not be confounded
with the superb palace reared by Queen Homai, in the midst of
Istakhar; which the Persians distinguish by the name of <i>Tchilminar</i>,
or the forty watch-towers. The origin of this city is ascribed by
some to Giamschid, and others carry it higher; but the Persian
tradition is, that it was built by the <i>Peris</i>, or Fairies, when the world
was governed by Gian Ben Gian.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 327.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_30" name="Note_219d" id="Note_219d">
<span class="smcap">Page 219.</span></a> <i>Gian Ben Gian</i></h4>

<p>By this appellation was distinguished the monarch of that species
of beings, whom the Arabians denominate <i>Gian</i> or <i>Ginn</i>; that is,
<i>Genii</i>; and the Tarikh Thabari, <i>Peris</i>, <i>Feez</i>, or <i>Fairies</i>. He was
renowned for his warlike expeditions and stupendous structures.
According to Oriental writers, the pyramids of Egypt were amongst
the monuments of his power. The buckler of this mighty sovereign,
no less famous than that of Achilles, was employed by three successive
Solimans, to achieve their marvellous exploits. From
them, it descended to Tahamurath, surnamed <i>Divbend</i>, or <i>Conqueror
of the</i> <span class="smcap">Giants</span>. This buckler was endowed with most wonderful

qualities, having been fabricated by talismanic art; and was alone
sufficient to destroy all the charms and enchantments of demons
or giants; which, on the contrary, were wrought by magic. Hence
we are no longer at a loss for the origin of the wonderful shield of
Atlante.</p>

<p>The reign of Gian Ben Gian over the Peris is said to have continued
for two thousand years; after which, <span class="smcap">Eblis</span> was sent by the Deity
to exile them, on account of their disorders, and confine them in
the remotest region of the earth.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 396. <span class="smcap">Bailly</span>,
<i>Sur l’Atlantide</i>, p. 147.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_31" name="Note_219e" id="Note_219e">
<span class="smcap">Page 219.</span></a> <i>... the talismans of Soliman</i></h4>

<p>The most famous <i>talisman</i> of the East, and which could control
even the arms and magic of the dives or giants, was <i>Mohur Solimani</i>,
the seal or ring of Soliman Jared, fifth monarch of the world after
Adam. By means of it the possessor had the entire command, not
only of the elements, but also of demons and every created being.—<span class="smcap">Richardson’s</span>
<i>Dissertation on the Languages, etc., of Eastern
Nations</i>, p. 272. <span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 820.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_32" name="Note_219f" id="Note_219f">
<span class="smcap">Page 219.</span></a> <i>... pre-Adamite sultans</i></h4>

<p>These monarchs, which were seventy-two in number, are said to
have governed each a distinct species of rational beings, prior to
the existence of Adam. Amongst the most renowned of them were
<span class="smcap">Soliman Raad</span>, <span class="smcap">Soliman Daki</span>, and <span class="smcap">Soliman Di Gian Ben Gian</span>.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>,
p. 820.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_33" name="Note_219g" id="Note_219g">
<span class="smcap">Page 219.</span></a> <i>... beware how thou enterest any dwelling</i></h4>

<p>Strange as this injunction may seem, it is by no means incongruous
to the customs of the country. Dr. Pocock mentions his travelling
with the train of the governor of Faiume, who, instead of lodging
in a village that was near, passed the night in a grove of palm-trees.—<i>Travels</i>,
vol. i, p. 56.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_34" name="Note_220a" id="Note_220a">
<span class="smcap">Page 220.</span></a> <i>... the ass of Balaam, the dog of the seven sleepers, and
the other animals admitted into the paradise of Mahomet</i></h4>

<p>It was a tenet of the Mussulman creed, that all animals would be
raised again, and many of them honoured with admission to paradise.
The story of the seven sleepers, borrowed from Christian legends,
was this: In the days of the Emperor Decius, there were certain
Ephesian youths of a good family, who, to avoid the flames of persecution,
fled to a secret cavern, and there slept for a number of
years. In their flight towards the cave, they were followed by a
dog, which, when they attempted to drive back, said, “<i>I love those
who are dear unto God; go sleep, therefore, and I will guard you.</i>”
For this dog the Mahometans retain so profound a reverence, that
their harshest sarcasm against a covetous person is, “He would not
throw a bone to the dog of the seven sleepers.” It is even said
that their superstition induces them to write his name upon the
letters they send to a distance, as a kind of talisman, to secure
them a safe conveyance.—<i>Religious Ceremonies</i>, vol. vii, p. 74 n.
<span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> <i>Koran</i>, chap. xviii and notes.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_35" name="Note_220b" id="Note_220b">
<span class="smcap">Page 220.</span></a> <i>Rocnabad</i></h4>

<p>The stream thus denominated flows near the city of Schiraz.
Its waters are uncommonly pure and limpid, and their banks
swarded with the finest verdure.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_36" name="Note_220c" id="Note_220c">
<span class="smcap">Page 220.</span></a> <i>Do you, with the advice of my mother, govern</i></h4>

<p>Females in the East were not anciently excluded from power.
In the Story of Zeyn Alasnam and the King of the Genii, the mother
of Zeyn undertakes, with the aid of his viziers, to govern Bassora
during his absence on a similar expedition.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_37" name="Note_221a" id="Note_221a">
<span class="smcap">Page 221.</span></a> <i>Chintz and muslin</i></h4>

<p>For many curious particulars relative to these articles, consult
Mr. Delaval’s <i>Inquiry concerning the Changes of Colours, etc.</i>;
to which may be added, <span class="smcap">Lucretius</span>, lib. iv, 5. <span class="smcap">Petronius</span>, c. 37.
<span class="smcap">Martial</span>, viii, Ep. 28, 17; xiv, Ep. 150. <span class="smcap">Plutarch</span>, in <i>Vita Catonis</i>.
<span class="smcap">Pliny</span>, viii, 48.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_38" name="Note_221b" id="Note_221b">
<span class="smcap">Page 221.</span></a> <i>Moullahs</i></h4>

<p>Those amongst the Mahometans who were bred to the law had
this title; and from their order the judges of cities and provinces
were taken.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_39" name="Note_221c" id="Note_221c">
<span class="smcap">Page 221.</span></a> <i>... the sacred Caaba</i></h4>

<p>That part of the temple at Mecca which is chiefly revered, and,
indeed, gives a sanctity to the rest, is a square stone building called
the Caaba, probably from its quadrangular form. The length of
this edifice, from north to south, is twenty-four cubits, and its
breadth, from east to west, twenty-three. The door is on the east
side, and stands about four cubits from the ground, the floor being
level with the threshold. The Caaba has a double roof, supported
internally by three octangular pillars of aloes wood, between which,
on a bar of iron, hangs a row of silver lamps. The outside is covered
with rich black damask, adorned with an embroidered band of
gold. This hanging, which is changed every year, was formerly
sent by the caliphs.—<span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> <i>Preliminary Discourse</i>, p. 152.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_40" name="Note_222a" id="Note_222a">
<span class="smcap">Page 222.</span></a> <i>... the supposed oratory</i></h4>

<p>The dishonouring such places as had an appearance of being
devoted to religious purposes, by converting them to the most
abject offices of nature, was an Oriental method of expressing
contempt, and hath continued from remote antiquity.—<span class="smcap">Harmer’s</span>
<i>Observations</i>, vol. ii, p. 493.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_41" name="Note_223a" id="Note_223a">
<span class="smcap">Page 223.</span></a> <i>... regale these pious poor souls with my good wine
from Schiraz</i></h4>

<p>The prohibition of wine in the Koran is so rigidly observed by the
conscientious, especially if they have performed the pilgrimage to
Mecca, that they deem it sinful to press grapes for the purpose of
making it, and even to use the money arising from its sale.—<span class="smcap">Chardin</span>,
<i>Voy. de Perse</i>, tom. ii, p. 212. <i>Schiraz</i> was famous in
the East for its wines of different sorts, but particularly for its
<i>red</i>, which was esteemed more highly than even the white wine of
<i>Kismische</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_42" name="Note_224a" id="Note_224a">
<span class="smcap">Page 224.</span></a> <i>... the most stately tulips of the East</i></h4>

<p>The tulip is a flower of Eastern growth, and there held in great
estimation. Thus, in an ode of Mesihi: “The edge of the bower is
filled with the light of Ahmed; among the plants the fortunate
<i>tulips</i> represent his companions.”</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_43" name="Note_224b" id="Note_224b">
<span class="smcap">Page 224.</span></a> <i>... certain cages of ladies</i></h4>

<p>There are many passages of the <i>Moallakat</i> in which these <i>cages</i> are
fully described. Thus, in the poem of Lebeid:</p>

<p>“How were thy tender affections raised, when the damsels of the
tribe departed; when they hid themselves in carriages of cotton,
like antelopes in their lair, and the tents as they were struck gave a
piercing sound!</p>

<p>“They were concealed in vehicles, whose sides were well covered
with awnings and carpets, with fine-spun curtains and pictured veils.”—<i>Moallakat</i>,
by <span class="smcap">Sir W. Jones</span>, pp. 46, 35. See also <span class="smcap">Lady M. W.
Montagu</span>, Let. xxvi.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_44" name="Note_224c" id="Note_224c">
<span class="smcap">Page 224.</span></a> <i>... dislodged</i></h4>

<p>Our language wants a verb, equivalent to the French <i>dénicher</i>, to
convey, in this instance, the precise sense of the author.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_45" name="Note_225a" id="Note_225a">
<span class="smcap">Page 225.</span></a> <i>... those nocturnal insects which presage evil</i></h4>

<p>It is observable that, in the fifth verse of the Ninety-first Psalm,
“the terror by night,” is rendered, in the old English version, “the
bugge by night.”<a name="FNanchor_1_1" id="FNanchor_1_1"></a><a href="#Footnote_1_1" class="nanchor">[1]</a> In the first settled parts of North America, every
nocturnal fly of a noxious quality is still generically named a bug;
whence the term bugbear signifies one that carries terror wherever
he goes. Beelzebub, or the Lord of Flies, was an Eastern appellative
given to the Devil; and the nocturnal sound called by the
Arabians <i>azif</i> was believed to be the howling of demons.</p>

<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote">
<p><a name="Footnote_1_1" id="Footnote_1_1"></a><a href="#FNanchor_1_1"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Instances are not wanted, both in the English and Greek versions,
where the translators have modified the sense of the original by their
own preconceived opinions. To this source may be ascribed the <span class="smcap">Bugge</span>
of our old Bible.</p></div>
</div>

<h4><a href="#Note_46" name="Note_225b" id="Note_225b">
<span class="smcap">Page 225.</span></a> <i>... the locusts were heard from the thickets on the plain
of Catoul</i></h4>

<p>The insects here mentioned are of the same species with the
<ins class="grk" title="tettix">τεττιξ</ins>
of the Greeks, and the <i>cicada</i> of the Latins. The locusts are
mentioned in Pliny, b. xi, 29. They were so called, from <i>loco usto</i>,
because the havoc they made wherever they passed left behind the
appearance of a place desolated by fire. How could then the
commentators of Vathek say that they are called <i>locusts</i>, from their
having been so denominated by the first English settlers in America?</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_47" name="Note_226a" id="Note_226a">
<span class="smcap">Page 226.</span></a> <i>Vathek ... with two little pages</i></h4>

<p>“All the pages of the seraglio are sons of Christians made slaves
in time of war, in their most tender age. The incursions of robbers
in the confines of Circassia afford the means of supplying the
seraglio, even in times of peace.”—<span class="smcap">Habesci’s</span> <i>State of the Ottoman
Empire</i>, p. 157. That the pages here mentioned were <i>Circassians</i>,
appears from the description of their complexion—<i>more fair than
the enamel of Franguestan</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_48" name="Note_226b" id="Note_226b">
<span class="smcap">Page 226.</span></a> <i>... confectioners and cooks</i></h4>

<p>What their precise number might have been in Vathek’s establishment
it is not now easy to determine; but in the household of
the present Grand Signior there are not fewer than a hundred and
ninety.—<span class="smcap">Habesci’s</span> <i>State of the Ottoman Empire</i>, p. 145.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_49" name="Note_227a" id="Note_227a">
<span class="smcap">Page 227.</span></a> <i>... hath seen some part of our bodies; and, what is
worse, our very faces</i></h4>

<p>“I was informed,” writes Dr. Cooke, “that the Persian women,
in general, would sooner expose to public view any part of their
bodies than their faces.”—<i>Voyages and Travels</i>, vol. ii, p. 443.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_50" name="Note_228a" id="Note_228a">
<span class="smcap">Page 228.</span></a> <i>... vases of snow, and grapes from the banks of the Tigris</i></h4>

<p>It was customary in Eastern climates, and especially in the sultry
season, to carry, when journeying, supplies of snow. These <i>æstivæ
nives</i> (as Mamertinus styles them) being put into separate vases,
were, by that means, better kept from the air, as no more was
opened at once than might suffice for immediate use. To preserve
the whole from solution, the vessels that contained it were secured
in packages of straw.—<i>Gesta Dei</i>, p. 1098. Vathek’s ancestor, the
<span class="smcap">Caliph Mahadi</span>, in the pilgrimage to Mecca, which he undertook
from ostentation rather than devotion, loaded upon camels so
prodigious a quantity, as was not only sufficient for himself and his
attendants amidst the burning sands of Arabia, but also to preserve,
in their natural freshness, the various fruits he took with him, and
to ice all their drink whilst he stayed at Mecca, the greater part of
whose inhabitants had never seen snow till then.—<i>Anecdotes
Arabes</i>, p. 326.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_51" name="Note_229a" id="Note_229a">
<span class="smcap">Page 229.</span></a> <i>... horrible Kaf</i></h4>

<p>This mountain, which, in reality, is no other than Caucasus, was
supposed to surround the earth, like a ring encompassing a finger.
The sun was believed to rise from one of its eminences (as over
Œta, by the Latin poets), and to set on the opposite; whence,
<i>from Kaf to Kaf</i>, signified, from one extremity of the earth to the
other. The fabulous historians of the East affirm, that this mountain
was founded upon a stone, called <i>sakhrat</i>, one grain of which,
according to Lokman, would enable the possessor to work wonders.
This stone is further described as the pivot of the earth, and said
to be one vast emerald, from the refraction of whose beams the
heavens derive their azure. It is added, that whenever God would
excite an earthquake, he commands the stone to move one of its
fibres (which supply in it the office of nerves), and, that being moved,
the part of the earth connected with it quakes, is convulsed, and
sometimes expands. Such is the philosophy of the Koran!</p>

<p>The <i>Tarikh Tabari</i>, written in Persian, analogous to the same
tradition, relates, that, were it not for this emerald, the earth would
be liable to perpetual commotions, and unfit for the abode of
mankind.</p>

<p>To arrive at the Kaf, a vast region,</p>

<p class="center">“Far from the sun and summer gale,”</p>

<p>must be traversed. Over this dark and cheerless desert, the way is
inextricable without the direction of supernatural guidance. Here
the dives or giants were confined, after their defeat by the first
heroes of the human race; and here, also, the peris, or fairies, are
supposed in ordinary to reside. Sukrage, the giant, was king of
Kaf, and had Rucail, one of the children of Adam, for his prime
minister. The giant Argenk, likewise, from the time that Tahamurath
made war upon him, reigned here, and reared a superb
palace in the city of Aherman, with galleries, on whose walls were
painted the creatures that inhabited the world prior to the formation
of Adam.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 230, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_52" name="Note_229b" id="Note_229b">
<span class="smcap">Page 229.</span></a> <i>... the Simurgh</i></h4>

<p>This is that wonderful bird of the East, concerning which so many
marvels are told: it was not only endowed with reason, but possessed
also the knowledge of every language. Hence it may be concluded
to have been a dive in a borrowed form. This creature relates of
itself that it had seen the great revolution of seven thousand years
twelve times commence and close; and that, in its duration, the
world had been seven times void of inhabitants, and as often
replenished. The Simurgh is represented as a great friend to the
race of Adam, and not less inimical to the dives. Tahamurath and
Aherman were apprised by its predictions of all that was destined
to befall them, and from it they obtained the promise of assistance
in every undertaking. Armed with the buckler of Gian Ben Gian,
Tahamurath was borne by it through the air, over the dark desert,
to Kaf. From its bosom his helmet was crested with plumes, which
the most renowned warriors have ever since worn. In every
conflict the Simurgh was invulnerable, and the heroes it favoured
never failed of success. Though possessed of power sufficient to
exterminate its foes, yet the exertion of that power was supposed to
be forbidden. Sadi, a serious author, gives it as an instance of the
universality of Providence, that the Simurgh, notwithstanding its
immense bulk, is at no loss for sustenance on the mountain of Kaf.
Inatulla hath described Getiafrose, queen of the Genii, as seated
on a golden chariot, drawn by ten simurghs; whose wings extended
wide as the earth-shading bir, and whose talons resembled the
proboscis of mighty elephants: but it does not appear from any
other writer, that there ever was more than <i>one</i>, which is frequently
called the <i>marvellous gryphon</i>, and said to be like that imaginary
monster.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 1017, 810, etc. <i>Tales of Inatulla</i>,
vol. ii, pp. 71, 72.</p>

<p>As the <i>magic shield of Atlante</i> resembles the <i>buckler of Gian Ben
Gian</i>, so <i>his Ippogrif</i> apparently came from the <i>Simurgh</i>, notwithstanding
the reference of Ariosto to the veridical Archbishop:</p>

<table><tr><td><div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i00">“Non ho veduto mai, nè letto altrove,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fuor che in Turpin, d’un si fatto animale.”<br /></span>
</div></div></td></tr></table>

<h4><a href="#Note_53" name="Note_229c" id="Note_229c">
<span class="smcap">Page 229.</span></a> <i>... palampores, etc.</i></h4>

<p>These elegant productions, which abound in all parts of the East,
were of very remote antiquity. Not only are <ins class="grk" title="sindonas EUANTHEIS">σινδονας ΕΥΑΝΘΕΙΣ</ins>,
<i>finely flowered linens</i>, noticed by Strabo; but Herodotus relates,
that the nations of Caucasus <i>adorned</i> their <i>garments</i> with <i>figures of
various creatures</i>, by means of the sap of certain vegetables; which,
when macerated and diluted with water, communicate colours
that cannot be washed out, and are no less permanent than the
texture itself.—<span class="smcap">Strabo</span>, l. xv, p. 709. <span class="smcap">Herodotus</span>, l. i, p. 96. The
Arabian Tales repeatedly describe these “<i>fine linens of India,
painted in the most lively colours</i>, and representing <i>beasts</i>, <i>trees</i>,
<i>flowers</i>, etc.”—<i>Arabian Nights</i>, vol. iv, p. 217, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_54" name="Note_229d" id="Note_229d">
<span class="smcap">Page 229.</span></a> <i>... afrits</i></h4>

<p>These were a kind of Medusæ, or Lamiæ, supposed to be the most
terrible and cruel of all the orders of the dives.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 66.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_55" name="Note_229e" id="Note_229e">
<span class="smcap">Page 229.</span></a> <i>... tablets fraught with preternatural qualities</i></h4>

<p>Mr. Richardson observes, “that in the East men of rank in general
carried with them pocket astronomical tables, which they consulted
on every affair of moment.” These tablets, however, were of the
<i>magical</i> kind, and such as often occur in works of romance. Thus,
in Boiardo, Orlando receives, from the father of the youth he had
rescued, “a book that would solve all doubts”; and, in Ariosto,
Logistilla bestows upon Astolpho a similar directory. The books
which Carathis turned over with Morakanabad were imagined to
have possessed the like virtues.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_56" name="Note_230a" id="Note_230a">
<span class="smcap">Page 230.</span></a> <i>... dwarfs</i></h4>

<p>Such unfortunate beings as are thus “curtailed of fair proportion,”
have been, for ages, an appendage of Eastern grandeur. One part
of their office consists in the instruction of the pages; but their
principal duty is the amusement of their master. If a dwarf
happen to be a mute, he is much esteemed; but if he be also an
eunuch, he is regarded as a prodigy, and no pains or expense are
spared to obtain him.—<span class="smcap">Habesci’s</span> <i>State of the Ottoman Empire</i>,
p. 164, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_57" name="Note_230b" id="Note_230b">
<span class="smcap">Page 230.</span></a> <i>... a small spring supplies us with water for the Abdest,
and we daily repeat prayers, etc.</i></h4>

<p>Amongst the indispensable rules of the Mahometan faith, ablution
is one of the chief. This rite is divided into three kinds. The first,
performed before prayers, is called <i>Abdest</i>. It begins with washing
both hands, and repeating these words: “Praised be Alla, who
created clean water, and gave it the virtue to purify: he also hath
rendered our faith conspicuous.” This done, water is taken in
the right hand thrice, and the mouth being washed, the worshipper
subjoins: “I pray thee, O Lord, to let me taste of that water which
thou hast given to thy prophet Mahomet in paradise, more fragrant
than musk, whiter than milk, sweeter than honey; and which has
the power to quench for ever the thirst of him that drinks it.”
This petition is accompanied with sniffing a little water into the
nose. The face is then three times washed, and behind the ears;
after which water is taken with both hands, beginning with the
right, and thrown to the elbow. The washing of the crown next
follows, and the apertures of the ear with the thumbs; afterward
the neck with all the fingers, and, finally, the feet. In this last
operation, it is held sufficient to wet the sandal only. At each
ceremonial a suitable petition is offered, and the whole concludes
with this: “Hold me up firmly, O Lord! and suffer not my foot to
slip, that I may not fall from the bridge into hell.” Nothing can
be more exemplary than the attention with which these rites are
performed. If an involuntary cough or sneeze interrupt them, the
whole service is begun anew, and that as often as it happens.—<span class="smcap">Habesci</span>,
p. 91, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_58" name="Note_230c" id="Note_230c">
<span class="smcap">Page 230.</span></a> <i>... reading the holy Koran</i></h4>

<p>The Mahometans have a book of stops or pauses in reading the
Koran, which divides it into <i>seventeen</i> sections, and allows of no
more.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 915.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_59" name="Note_230d" id="Note_230d">
<span class="smcap">Page 230.</span></a> <i>... the bells of a cafila</i></h4>

<p>A cafila, or caravan, according to Pitts, is divided into distinct
companies, at the head of which an officer, or person of distinction,
is carried in a kind of horse-litter, and followed by a sumpter camel,
loaded with his treasure. This camel hath a bell fastened to either
side, the sound of which may be heard at a considerable distance.
Others have bells on their necks and their legs, to solace them when
drooping with heat and fatigue. Inatulla also, in his tales, hath
a similar reference: “The bells of the cafila may be rung in the
thirsty desert.” Vol. ii, p. 15. These small bells were known
at Rome from the earliest times, and called from their sounds
<i>tintinnabulum</i>. Phædrus gives us a lively description of the
mule carrying the fiscal moneys: <i>clarumque collo jactans tintinnabulum</i>.—Bk.
ii, fabl. vii.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_60" name="Note_230e" id="Note_230e">
<span class="smcap">Page 230.</span></a> <i>Deggial</i></h4>

<p>This word signifies properly a liar and impostor, but is applied
by Mahometan writers to their <i>Antichrist</i>. He is described as having
but one eye and eyebrow, and on his forehead the radicals of <i>cafer</i>
or <i>infidel</i> are said to be impressed. According to the traditions of
the faithful, his first appearance will be between Irak and Syria,
mounted on an ass. Seventy thousand Jews from Ispahan are
expected to follow him. His continuance on earth is to be forty
days. All places are to be destroyed by him and his emissaries,
except <i>Mecca</i> or <i>Medina</i>, which will be protected by angels from
the general overthrow. At last, however, he will be slain by Jesus,
who is to encounter him at the gate of Lud.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 282.
<span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> <i>Preliminary Discourse</i>, p. 106.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_61" name="Note_230f" id="Note_230f">
<span class="smcap">Page 230.</span></a> <i>... dictated by the blessed Intelligence</i></h4>

<p>That is, the angel <i>Gabriel</i>. The Mahometans deny that the Koran
was composed by their prophet; it being their general and orthodox
belief, that it is of divine original; nay, even eternal and uncreated,
remaining in the very essence of God; that the first transcript has
been from everlasting by his throne, written on a table of immense
size, called the <i>preserved table</i>; on which are also recorded the divine
decrees, past and future: that a copy was by the ministry of the
angel <i>Gabriel</i> sent down to the lowest heaven, in the month of
<i>Ramadan</i>, on the night of <i>power</i>: from whence <i>Gabriel</i> revealed it
to Mahomet by parcels, some at Mecca, and some at Medina.—<i>Al
Koran</i>, ch. ii, etc. <span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> <i>Preliminary Discourse</i>, p. 85.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_62" name="Note_231a" id="Note_231a">
<span class="smcap">Page 231.</span></a> <i>... to kiss the fringe of your consecrated robe</i></h4>

<p>This observance was an act of the most profound reverence.—<i>Arabian
Nights</i>, vol. iv, p. 236, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_63" name="Note_231b" id="Note_231b">
<span class="smcap">Page 231.</span></a> <i>... and implore you to enter his humble habitation</i></h4>

<p>It has long been customary for the Arabs to change their habitations
with the seasons. Thus Antara:</p>

<p>“Thou hast possessed thyself of my heart; thou hast fixed thy
abode, and art settled there, as a beloved and cherished inhabitant.</p>

<p>“Yet how can I visit my fair one, whilst her family have their
<i>vernal mansion</i> in Oneizatain, and mine are stationed in Ghailem?”</p>

<p>Xenophon relates, in his Anabasis, that it was customary for the kings
of Persia <ins class="grk" title="therizein kai erizein">θεριζειν και εριζειν</ins>, to pass the <i>summer</i> and <i>spring</i> in
Susa and Ecbatana; and Plutarch observes further, that their winters
were spent in Babylon, their summers in Media (that is, <i>Ecbatana</i>), and
the pleasantest part of <i>spring</i> in Susa: <ins class="grk" title="Kaitoi&#10;tousge Persôn basileas emakarizon en babylôni ton cheimôna diagonias; en&#10;de Mêdia to theros; en de Sousois, to hêdiston tou EAROS.">Καιτοι τουσγε
Περσων βασιλεας εμακαριζον εν βαβυλωνι τον χειμωνα διαγονιας· εν δε
Μηδιᾳ το θερος· εν δε Σουσοις, το ἡδιστον του ΕΑΡΟΣ</ins>.—<i>De Exil.</i>,
p. 604.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_64" name="Note_231c" id="Note_231c">
<span class="smcap">Page 231.</span></a> <i>... red characters</i></h4>

<p>The laws of Draco are recorded by Plutarch, in his <i>Life of Solon</i>,
to have been written in blood. If more were meant by this expression,
than that those laws were of a sanguinary nature, they will
furnish the earliest instance of the use of <i>red characters</i>, which were
afterwards considered as appropriate to supreme authority, and
employed to denounce some requisition or threatening design to
strike terror. According to Suidas, this manner of writing was,
likewise, practised in <i>magic rites</i>. Hence their application to the
instance here mentioned. <span class="smcap">Trotz</span>, <i>In Herm. Hugonem</i>, pp. 106, 307.
<span class="smcap">Suidas</span> <i>sub voc.</i>
<ins class="grk" title="Thettalê gynê">Θετταλη γυνη</ins>.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_65" name="Note_231d" id="Note_231d">
<span class="smcap">Page 231.</span></a> <i>... thy body shall be spit upon</i></h4>

<p>There was no mark of contempt amongst the Easterns so ignominious
as this.—<i>Arabian Nights</i>, vol. i, p. 115.; vol. iv, p. 275. It
was the same in the days of Job. Herodotus relates of the Medes,
<ins class="grk" title="PTUEIN antion AISCHRON esti">ΠΤΥΕΙΝ αντιον ΑΙΣΧΡΟΝ εστι</ins>, and Xenophon relates,
<ins class="grk" title="AISCHRON esti Persais to APOPTUEIN">ΑΙΣΧΡΟΝ
εστι Περσαις το ΑΠΟΠΤΥΕΙΝ</ins>. Hence the reason is evident for
spitting on our Saviour.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_66" name="Note_231e" id="Note_231e">
<span class="smcap">Page 231.</span></a> <i>... bats will nestle in thy belly</i></h4>

<p>Bats in these countries were very abundant, and, both from their
numbers and nature, held in abhorrence. See what is related of
them by <span class="smcap">Thevenot</span>, part i, pp. 132, 133, <span class="smcap">Egmont</span> and <span class="smcap">Hayman</span>,
vol. ii, p. 87, and other travellers in the East.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_67" name="Note_232a" id="Note_232a">
<span class="smcap">Page 232.</span></a> <i>... the Bismillah</i></h4>

<p>This word (which is prefixed to every chapter of the Koran except
the ninth) signifies, “in the name of the most merciful God.” It
became not the initiatory formula of prayer till the time of Moez
the Fatimite. <span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 326.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_68" name="Note_232b" id="Note_232b">
<span class="smcap">Page 232.</span></a> <i>... inscription</i></h4>

<p>Inscriptions of this sort are still retained. Thus Ludeke:
“Interni non solum Divani pluriumque conclavium parietes, sed
etiam frontispicia super portas inscriptiones habent.”—<i>Expositio</i>,
p. 54. In the History of Amine, we find an inscription over a gate,
in letters of gold, analogous to this of Fakreddin: “Here is the abode
of everlasting pleasures and content.”—<i>Arabian Nights</i>, vol. i, p. 193.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_69" name="Note_232c" id="Note_232c">
<span class="smcap">Page 232.</span></a> <i>... a magnificent tecthtrevan</i></h4>

<p>This kind of <i>moving throne</i>, though more common at present than
in the days of Vathek, is still confined to persons of the highest rank.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_70" name="Note_233a" id="Note_233a">
<span class="smcap">Page 233.</span></a> <i>... your ivory limbs</i></h4>

<p>The Arabians compare the skin of a beautiful woman to the egg
of the ostrich, when preserved unsullied. Thus Amriolkais:</p>

<p>“Delicate was her shape; fair her skin; and her body well proportioned:
her bosom was as smooth as a mirror,—</p>

<p>“Or like the pure egg of an ostrich, of a yellowish tint blended
with white.”</p>

<p>Also the Koran: “Near them shall lie the virgins of Paradise,
refraining their looks from beholding any besides their spouses,
having large black eyes, and resembling the eggs of an ostrich,
covered with feathers from dust.”—<i>Moallakat</i>, p. 8. <i>Al Koran</i>, ch. 27.</p>

<p>But though the Arabian epithet be taken from thence, yet the
word ivory is substituted, as more analogous to European ideas,
and not foreign from the Eastern. Thus Amru:</p>

<p>“And two sweet breasts, smooth and white as vessels of ivory,
modestly defended from the hand of those who presume to touch
them.”—<i>Moallakat</i>, p. 77.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_71" name="Note_233b" id="Note_233b">
<span class="smcap">Page 233.</span></a> <i>... baths of rose-water</i></h4>

<p>The use of perfumed waters for the purpose of bathing is of an
early origin in the East, where every odoriferous plant sheds a richer
fragrance than is known to our more humid climates. The rose
which yields this lotion is, according to Hasselquist, of a beautiful
pale blush colour, double, large as a man’s fist, and more exquisite
in scent than any other species. The quantities of this water
distilled annually at Fajhum, and carried to distant countries, is
immense. The mode of conveying it is in vessels of copper coated
with wax.—<i>Voyag.</i>, p. 248. Ben Jonson makes Volpone say to
Celia:</p>

<table><tr><td><div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i00">“Their bath shall be the juyce of gillyflowres,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spirit of roses, and of violets.”<br /></span>
</div></div></td></tr></table>

<h4><a href="#Note_72" name="Note_233c" id="Note_233c">
<span class="smcap">Page 233.</span></a> <i>... lamb à la crême</i></h4>

<p>No dish among the Easterns was more generally admired. The
caliph Abdolmelek, at a splendid entertainment, to which whoever
came was welcome, asked Amrou, the son of Hareth, what kind of
meat he preferred to all others. The old man answered, “An ass’s
neck, well seasoned and roasted.”—“But what say you,” replied
the caliph, “to the leg or shoulder of a <span class="ucsmcap">LAMB</span> <i>à la crême</i>?” and added:</p>

<p class="center">“How sweetly we live if a shadow would last!”</p>

<p>—<i>MS. Laud.</i> No. 161. <span class="smcap">S. Ockley’s</span> <i>History of the Saracens</i>,
vol. ii, p. 277.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_73" name="Note_233d" id="Note_233d">
<span class="smcap">Page 233.</span></a> <i>... made the dwarfs dance against their will</i></h4>

<p>Ali Chelebi al Moufti, in a treatise on the subject, held that dancing
after the example of the dervishes, who made it a part of their
devotion, was allowable. But in this opinion he was deemed to
be heterodox; for Mahometans, in general, place dancing amongst
the things that are forbidden.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 98.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_74" name="Note_233e" id="Note_233e">
<span class="smcap">Page 233.</span></a> <i>... durst not refuse the commander of the faithful</i></h4>

<p>The mandates of Oriental potentates have ever been accounted
irresistible. Hence the submission of these devotees to the will
of the caliph.—Esther, i, 19. Daniel, vi, 8. <span class="smcap">Ludeke</span>, <i>Expos. brevis</i>,
p. 60.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_75" name="Note_233f" id="Note_233f">
<span class="smcap">Page 233.</span></a> <i>... the nine hundred and ninety-ninth time</i></h4>

<p>The Mahometans boast of a doctor who is reported to have read
over the Koran not fewer than twenty thousand times.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>,
p. 75.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_76" name="Note_234a" id="Note_234a">
<span class="smcap">Page 234.</span></a> <i>... black eunuchs, sabre in hand</i></h4>

<p>In this manner the apartments of the ladies were constantly
guarded. Thus, in the Story of the Enchanted Horse, Firouz
Schah, traversing a strange palace by night, entered a room, “and
by the light of a lantern saw that the persons he had heard snoring
were black eunuchs with naked sabres by them, which was enough
to inform him that this was the guard-chamber of some queen or
princess.”—<i>Arabian Nights</i>, vol. iv, p. 189.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_77" name="Note_234b" id="Note_234b">
<span class="smcap">Page 234.</span></a> <i>... to let down the great swing</i></h4>

<p>The swing was an exercise much used in the apartments of the
Eastern ladies, and not only contributed to their health, but also
to their amusement.—<i>Tales of Inatulla</i>, vol. i, p. 259.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_78" name="Note_235a" id="Note_235a">
<span class="smcap">Page 235.</span></a> <i>... melodious Philomel, I am thy rose</i></h4>

<p>The passion of the nightingale for the rose is celebrated over all
the East. Thus Mesihi, as translated by Sir W. Jones:</p>

<table><tr><td><div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i00">“Come, charming maid, and hear thy poet sing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thyself the rose, and he the bird of spring:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Love bids him sing, and love will be obey’d,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be gay; too soon the flowers of spring will fade.”<br /></span>
</div></div></td></tr></table>

<h4><a href="#Note_79" name="Note_236a" id="Note_236a">
<span class="smcap">Page 236.</span></a> <i>... calenders</i></h4>

<p>These were a sort of men amongst the Mahometans who abandoned
father and mother, wife and children, relations and possessions, to
wander through the world, under a pretence of religion, entirely
subsisting on the fortuitous bounty of those they had the address
to dupe.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, <i>Suppl.</i>, p. 204.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_80" name="Note_236b" id="Note_236b">
<span class="smcap">Page 236.</span></a> <i>... santons</i></h4>

<p>A body of religionists, who were also called abdals, and pretended
to be inspired with the most enthusiastic raptures of divine love.
They were regarded by the vulgar as <i>saints</i>.—<span class="smcap">Olearius</span>, tom. i,
p. 971. <span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 5.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_81" name="Note_236c" id="Note_236c">
<span class="smcap">Page 236.</span></a> <i>... dervishes</i></h4>

<p>The term <i>dervish</i> signifies a <i>poor man</i>, and is the general appellation
by which a religious amongst the Mahometans is named. There
are, however, discriminations that distinguish this class from the
others already mentioned. They are bound by no vow of poverty,
they abstain not from marriage, and, whenever disposed, they may
relinquish both their blue shirt and profession.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>,
<i>Suppl.</i>, 214. It is observable, that these different orders, though
not established till the reign of Nasser al Samani, are notwithstanding
mentioned by our author as coeval with Vathek, and by the author
of the <i>Arabian Nights</i> as existing in the days of Haroun al Raschid;
so that the Arabian fabulists appear as inattentive to chronological
exactness in points of this sort as our immortal dramatist himself.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_82" name="Note_236d" id="Note_236d">
<span class="smcap">Page 236.</span></a> <i>... Brahmins</i></h4>

<p>These constituted the principal caste of the Indians, according
to whose doctrine <i>Brahma</i>, from whom they are called, is the first
of the three created beings by whom the world was made. This
Brahma is said to have communicated to the Indians four books,
in which all the sciences and ceremonies of their religion are comprised.
The word Brahma, in the Indian language, signifies <i>pervading
all things</i>. The Brahmins lead a life of most rigid abstinence
refraining not only from the use, but even the touch, of animal
food; and are equally exemplary for their contempt of pleasures
and devotion to philosophy and religion.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 212.
<span class="smcap">Bruckeri</span> <i>Hist. Philosoph.</i>, tom. i, p. 194.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_83" name="Note_236e" id="Note_236e">
<span class="smcap">Page 236.</span></a> <i>... fakirs</i></h4>

<p>This sect were a kind of religious anchorets, who spent their whole
lives in the severest austerities and mortification. It is almost
impossible for the imagination to form an extravagance that has
not been practised by some of them, to torment themselves. As
their reputation for sanctity rises in proportion to their sufferings,
those amongst them are reverenced the most, who are most ingenious
in the invention of tortures, and persevering in enduring them.
Hence some have persisted in sitting or standing for years together
in one unvaried posture, supporting an almost intolerable burden,
dragging the most cumbrous chains, exposing their naked bodies
to the scorching sun, and hanging with the head downward before
the fiercest fires.—<i>Relig. Ceremon.</i>, vol. iii, p. 264, etc. <span class="smcap">White’s</span>
<i>Sermons</i>, p. 504.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_84" name="Note_237a" id="Note_237a">
<span class="smcap">Page 237.</span></a> <i>... Visnow and Ixhora</i></h4>

<p>Two deities of the East Indians, concerning whose history and
adventures more nonsense is related than can be found in the whole
compass of mythology besides. The traditions of their votaries
are, no doubt, allegorical; but without a key to disclose their mystic
import, they are little better than senseless jargon.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_85" name="Note_237b" id="Note_237b">
<span class="smcap">Page 237.</span></a> <i>... talapoins</i></h4>

<p>This order, which abounds in Siam, Laos, Pegu, and other countries,
consists of different classes, and both sexes, but chiefly of
men.—<i>Relig. Ceremon.</i>, vol. iv, p. 62, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_86" name="Note_237c" id="Note_237c">
<span class="smcap">Page 237.</span></a> <i>... small plates of abominations</i></h4>

<p>The Koran hath established several distinctions relative to
different kinds of food, in imitation of the Jewish prescriptions;
and many Mahometans are so scrupulous as not to touch the flesh
of any animal over which, <i>in articulo mortis</i>, the butcher had omitted
to pronounce the <i>Bismillah</i>.—<i>Relig. Ceremon.</i>, vol. vii, p. 110.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_87" name="Note_238a" id="Note_238a">
<span class="smcap">Page 238.</span></a> <i>... fish which they drew from a river</i></h4>

<p>According to Le Bruyn, the Oriental method of fishing with a
line, is by winding it round the finger, and when the fisherman feels
that the bait is taken, he draws in the string with alternate hands:
in this way, he adds, a good dish of fish is soon caught. Tom. i,
p. 564. It appears, from a circumstance related by Galand, that
Vathek was fond of this amusement.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, <i>Suppl.</i>, p. 210.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_88" name="Note_238b" id="Note_238b">
<span class="smcap">Page 238.</span></a> <i>Sinai</i></h4>

<p>This mountain is deemed by Mahometans the noblest of all others,
and even regarded with the highest veneration, because the divine
law was promulgated from it.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 812.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_89" name="Note_238c" id="Note_238c">
<span class="smcap">Page 238.</span></a> <i>Peris</i></h4>

<p>The word <i>Peri</i>, in the Persian language, signifies that beautiful
race of creatures which constitutes the link between angels and
men. The Arabians call them <i>Ginn</i>, or genii, and we (from the
Persian, perhaps) <i>Fairies</i>: at least, the peris of the Persian romance
correspond to that imaginary class of beings in our poetical system.
The Italians denominate them <i>Fata</i>, in allusion to their power of
charming and enchanting; thus the <i>Manto fatidica</i> of Virgil is
rendered in <i>Orlando</i>, <i>La Fata Manto</i>. The term ginn being common
to both peris and dives, some have erroneously fancied that the
peris were female dives. This appellation, however, served only
to discriminate their common nature from the angelic and human,
without respect to their qualities, moral or personal. Thus, the
dives are hideous and wicked, whilst the peris are beautiful and
good. Amongst the Persian poets, the beauty of the peris is
proverbial: insomuch that a woman superlatively handsome, is
styled by them, <i>the offspring of a Peri</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_90" name="Note_239a" id="Note_239a">
<span class="smcap">Page 239.</span></a> <i>... butterflies of Cashmere</i></h4>

<p>The same insects are celebrated in an unpublished poem of Mesihi.
Sir Anthony Shirley relates, that it was customary in Persia, “to
hawke after butterflies with sparrows, made to that use, and
stares.” It is, perhaps, to this amusement that our author alludes
in the context.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_91" name="Note_240a" id="Note_240a">
<span class="smcap">Page 240.</span></a> <i>Megnoun and Leilah</i></h4>

<p>These personages are esteemed amongst the Arabians as the most
beautiful, chaste, and impassioned of lovers; and their amours have
been celebrated with all the charms of verse, in every Oriental
language. The Mahometans regard them, and the poetical records
of their love, in the same light as the Bridegroom and Spouse, and
the Song of Songs, are regarded by the Jews.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 573.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_92" name="Note_240b" id="Note_240b">
<span class="smcap">Page 240.</span></a> <i>... they still detained him in the harem</i></h4>

<p>Noureddin, who was as old as Gulchenrouz, had a similar indulgence
of resorting to the harem, and no less availed himself of it.—<i>Arabian
Nights</i>, vol. iii, pp. 9, 10.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_93" name="Note_240c" id="Note_240c">
<span class="smcap">Page 240.</span></a> <i>... dart the lance in the chase</i></h4>

<p>Throwing the lance was a favourite pastime with the young
Arabians; and so expert were they in this practice (which prepared
them for the mightier conflicts, both of the chase and of war),
that they could bear off a ring on the points of their javelins.—<span class="smcap">Richardson’s</span>
<i>Dissertation on the Languages, etc., of Eastern
Nations</i>, pp. 198, 281.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_94" name="Note_240d" id="Note_240d">
<span class="smcap">Page 240.</span></a> <i>Shaddukian and Ambreabad</i></h4>

<p>These were two cities of the peris, in the imaginary region of
<i>Ginnistan</i>: the former signifies <i>pleasure</i> and <i>desire</i>, the latter, <i>the
city of Ambergris</i>.—See <span class="smcap">Richardson’s</span> <i>Dissertation on the Languages,
etc., of Eastern Nations</i>, p. 169.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_95" name="Note_242a" id="Note_242a">
<span class="smcap">Page 242.</span></a> <i>... a spoon of cocknos</i></h4>

<p>The cocknos is a bird whose beak is much esteemed for its beautiful
polish, and sometimes used as a spoon. Thus, in the <i>History of Atalmulck
and Zelica Begum</i>, it was employed for a similar purpose:
“Zelica having called for refreshment, six old slaves instantly
brought in and distributed <i>Mahramas</i>, and then served about in
a great basin of Martabam, a salad <i>made of herbs of various kinds,
citron juice, and the pith of cucumbers</i>. They served it first to the
Princess in a <i>cocknos beak</i>: she took a beak of the salad, ate it, and
gave another to the next slave that sat by her on her right hand;
which slave did as her mistress had done.”</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_96" name="Note_243a" id="Note_243a">
<span class="smcap">Page 243.</span></a> <i>Ghouls</i></h4>

<p>Ghoul, or <i>ghul</i>, in Arabic, signifies any terrifying object, which
deprives people of the use of their senses. Hence it became the
appellative of that species of monster which was supposed to haunt
forests, cemeteries, and other lonely places; and believed not only
to tear in pieces the living, but to dig up and devour the dead.—<span class="smcap">Richardson’s</span>
<i>Dissertation on the Languages, etc., of Eastern
Nations</i>, pp. 174, 274.</p>

<p>That kind of insanity called by the Arabians <i>Kutrub</i> (a word
signifying not only a <i>wolf</i>, but likewise a <i>male Ghoul</i>), which incites
such as are afflicted with it to roam howling amidst those melancholy
haunts, may cast some light on the nature of the possession
recorded by St. Mark, ch. v, I, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_97" name="Note_244a" id="Note_244a">
<span class="smcap">Page 244.</span></a> <i>... feathers of the heron, all sparkling with
carbuncles</i></h4>

<p>Panaches of this kind are amongst the attributes of Eastern
royalty.—<i>Tales of Inatulla</i>, vol. ii, p. 205.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_98" name="Note_244b" id="Note_244b">
<span class="smcap">Page 244.</span></a> <i>... whose eyes pervade the inmost soul of a female</i></h4>

<p>The original in this instance, as in the others already noticed, is
more analogous to the French than the English idiom: “<i>Dont
l’œil pénètre jusqu’à la moelle des jeunes filles.</i>”</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_99" name="Note_244c" id="Note_244c">
<span class="smcap">Page 244.</span></a> <i>... the carbuncle of Giamschid</i></h4>

<p>This mighty potentate was the fourth sovereign of the dynasty
of the Pischadians, and brother or nephew to Tahamurath. His
proper name was <i>Giam</i> or <i>Gem</i>, and <i>Schid</i>, which in the language
of the ancient Persians denominated the sun: an addition ascribed
by some to the majesty of his person, and by others to the splendour
of his actions. One of the most magnificent monuments of his
reign was the city of Istakhar, of which Tahamurath had laid the
foundations. This city, at present called <i>Gihil-</i>, or <i>Tchil-minar</i>,
from the forty columns reared in it by Homai, or (according to our
author and others) by Soliman Ben Daoud, was known to the
Greeks by the name of Persepolis; and there is still extant in the
East a tradition, that, when Alexander burnt the edifices of the
Persian kings, seven stupendous structures of Giamschid were
consumed with his palace. This prince, after having subjected to
his empire seven vast provinces of Upper Asia, and enjoyed in peace
a long reign (which some authors have protracted to 700 years),
became intoxicated with his greatness; and, foolishly fancying it
would have no end, arrogated to himself divine honours. But the
Almighty raised up, even in his own house, a terrible instrument
to abase his pride, by whom he was easily overcome, and driven
into exile.</p>

<p>The author of <i>Giame al tavatikh</i> mentions the cup, or concave
mirror of Giamschid, formed of a gem, and called the cup of the
sun. To this vessel the Persian poets often refer, and allegorize
it in different ways. They attribute to it the property of exhibiting
everything in the compass of nature, and even some things that are
preternatural. The gem it consisted of appears to be the carbuncle
or oriental ruby; which, from its resemblance to a burning coal,
and the splendour it was supposed to emit in the dark, was called
Schebgerag, or, the torch of the night. According to Strabo, it
obtained its high estimation amongst the Persians, who were
worshippers of fire, from its igneous qualities; and perhaps those
virtues for which it hath been styled “the first of stones.”</p>

<p>Milton had a learned retrospect to its fabulous powers, in describing
the Old Serpent:</p>

<table><tr><td><div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">... his head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes—<br /></span>
</div></div></td></tr></table>

<p><span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, pp. 392, 395, 780, etc. <span class="smcap">Brighte</span>, <i>On Melancholie</i>,
p. 321. <i>Paradise Lost</i>, IX, 499.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_100" name="Note_244d" id="Note_244d">
<span class="smcap">Page 244.</span></a> <i>... have you false keys? Come to the dark
chamber</i></h4>

<p>It was the office of Shaban, as chief eunuch, to keep the key of
the ladies’ apartment. In the Story of Ganem, Haroun al Raschid
commands Mesrour, the chief of the eunuchs, “to take the perfidious
Fetnah, and shut her up in the dark tower.” That tower
was within the inclosure of the palace, and commonly served as a
prison for the favourites who might chance to disgust the caliph.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_101" name="Note_246a" id="Note_246a">
<span class="smcap">Page 246.</span></a> <i>... their faith is mutually plighted</i></h4>

<p>When females in the East are betrothed, their palms and fingers
are tinged of a crimson colour, with the herb hinnah. This is
called “the crimson of consent.”—<i>Tales of Inatulla</i>, vol. ii, p. 15.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_102" name="Note_246b" id="Note_246b">
<span class="smcap">Page 246.</span></a> <i>... violate the rights of hospitality</i></h4>

<p>So high an idea of these rights prevails amongst the Arabians,
that “a bread and salt traitor,” is the most opprobrious invective
with which one person can reproach another.—<span class="smcap">Richardson’s</span>
<i>Dissertation on the Languages, etc., of Eastern Nations</i>, p. 219. See
also the Story of Ali Baba and The Forty Thieves, in the <i>Arabian
Nights</i>, vol. iv, p. 166.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_103" name="Note_246c" id="Note_246c">
<span class="smcap">Page 246.</span></a> <i>... narcotic powder</i></h4>

<p>A drug of the same quality, mixed in lemonade, is given to
Zobeide, in the Story of Ganem.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_104" name="Note_248a" id="Note_248a">
<span class="smcap">Page 248.</span></a> <i>Funeral vestments were prepared; their bodies washed, etc.</i></h4>

<p>The rites here practised had obtained from the earliest ages.
Most of them may be found in Homer and the other poets of Greece.
Lucian describes the dead in his time as washed, perfumed, vested,
and crowned, <ins class="grk" title="hôraios anthesin">ὡραιος ανθεσιν</ins>, with the flowers most in season; or,
according to other writers, those in particular which the deceased
were wont to prefer. The elegant editor of the <i>Ruins of Palmyra</i>
mentions the fragments of a mummy found there, the hair of which
was plaited exactly in the manner as worn at present by the women
of Arabia.</p>

<p>The burial dress from the days of Homer hath been commonly
white, and amongst Mahometans is made without a seam, that it
may not impede the ceremonial of kneeling in the grave, when the
dead person undergoes examination.—<span class="smcap">Homer</span>, <span class="smcap">Euripides</span>, etc.,
<i>passim</i>. <span class="smcap">Lucian</span>, tom. ii, p. 927. <span class="smcap">Paschal</span>, <i>De Coron.</i>, p. 225. <i>Ruins
of Palmyra</i>, pp. 22, 23. <i>Iliad</i>, xviii, 352. <i>Relig. Cerem.</i>, vol. vii, p. 117.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_105" name="Note_248b" id="Note_248b">
<span class="smcap">Page 248.</span></a> <i>... all instruments of music were broken</i></h4>

<p>Thus, in the <i>Arabian Nights</i>: “Haroun al Raschid wept over
Schemselnihar, and, before he left the room, ordered all the musical
instruments to be broken.”—Vol. ii, p. 196.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_106" name="Note_248c" id="Note_248c">
<span class="smcap">Page 248.</span></a> <i>... imans began to recite their prayers</i></h4>

<p>An iman is the principal priest of a mosque. It was the office
of the imans to precede the bier, praying as the procession moved
on.—<i>Relig. Cerem.</i>, vol. vii, p. 117.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_107" name="Note_248d" id="Note_248d">
<span class="smcap">Page 248.</span></a> <i>The wailful cries of La Ilah illa Alla!</i></h4>

<p>This exclamation, which contains the leading principle of
Mahometan belief, and signifies <i>there is no God but God</i>, was commonly
uttered under some violent emotion of mind. The Spaniards
adopted it from their Moorish neighbours, and Cervantes hath
used it in <i>Don Quixote</i>: “En esto llegáron corriendo con grita,
<span class="ucsmcap">LILILIES</span> (literally <i>professions of faith in Alla</i>), y algazara los de las
libreas adonde Don Quixote suspenso y atónito estava.”—<i>Parte
segunda</i>, cap. lxi, tom. iv, p. 241.</p>

<p>The same expression is sometimes written by the Spaniards,
<i>Lilaila</i>, and <i>Hila hilahaila</i>.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_108" name="Note_249a" id="Note_249a">
<span class="smcap">Page 249.</span></a> <i>... the angel of death had opened the portal of some
other world</i></h4>

<p>The name of this exterminating angel is <i>Azrael</i>, and his office is
to conduct the dead to the abode assigned them; which is said by
some to be near the place of their interment. Such was the office
of Mercury in the Grecian mythology.—<span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> <i>Preliminary Discourse</i>,
p. 101. <span class="smcap">Hyde</span>, <i>in notis ad Bobov.</i>, p. 19. <span class="smcap">R. Elias</span>, in <i>Tishbi</i>.
<span class="smcap">Buxtorf</span>, <i>Synag. Jud. et Lexic. Talmud</i>. <span class="smcap">Homer</span>, <i>Odyssey</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_109" name="Note_250a" id="Note_250a">
<span class="smcap">Page 250.</span></a> <i>Monker and Nakir</i></h4>

<p>These are two black angels of a tremendous appearance, who
examine the departed on the subject of his faith: by whom, if he
give not a satisfactory account, he is sure to be cudgelled with
maces of red-hot iron, and tormented more variously than words
can describe.—<i>Religious Ceremonies</i>, vol. vii, pp. 59, 68-118; vol. v,
p. 290. <span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> <i>Preliminary Discourse</i>, p. 101.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_110" name="Note_250b" id="Note_250b">
<span class="smcap">Page 250.</span></a> <i>... the fatal bridge</i></h4>

<p>This bridge, called in Arabic <i>al Sirat</i>, and said to extend over the
infernal gulf, is represented as narrower than a spider’s web, and
sharper than the edge of a sword. Though the attempt to cross
it be—</p>

<table><tr><td><div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i00">“More full of peril, and advent’rous spirit,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than to o’erwalk a current, roaring loud,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the unsteadfast footing of a spear;”<br /></span>
</div></div></td></tr></table>

<p>yet the paradise of Mahomet can be entered by no other avenue.
Those, indeed, who have behaved well need not be alarmed; mixed
characters will find it difficult; but the wicked soon miss their standing,
and plunge headlong into the abyss.—<span class="smcap">Pococke</span> in <i>Port. Mos.</i>,
p. 282, etc. Milton apparently copied from this well-known fiction,
and not, as Dr. Warton conjectured, from the poet Sadi, his way—</p>

<table><tr><td><div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i00">“Over the dark abyss, whose boiling gulf<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tamely endured a bridge of wond’rous length,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From hell continued, reaching the utmost orb<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of this frail world.”<br /></span>
</div></div></td></tr></table>

<h4><a href="#Note_111" name="Note_250c" id="Note_250c">
<span class="smcap">Page 250.</span></a> <i>... a certain series of years</i></h4>

<p>According to the tradition from the prophet, not less than nine
hundred, nor more than seven thousand.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_112" name="Note_250d" id="Note_250d">
<span class="smcap">Page 250.</span></a> <i>... the sacred camel</i></h4>

<p>It was an article of the Mahometan creed, that all animals would
be raised again, and some of them admitted into paradise. The
animal here mentioned appears to have been one of those <i>white-winged</i>
<span class="ucsmcap">CAMELS</span> <i>caparisoned with gold</i>, which Ali affirmed had been
provided to convey the faithful.—<i>Religious Ceremonies</i>, vol. vii,
p. 70. <span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> <i>Preliminary Discourse</i>, p. 112. <span class="smcap">Al Jauheri.</span> <span class="smcap">Ebno’l
Athir</span>, etc.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_113" name="Note_251a" id="Note_251a">
<span class="smcap">Page 251.</span></a> <i>... basket-making</i></h4>

<p>This sort of basket work hath been long used in the East, and
consists of the leaves of the date-bearing palm. Panniers of this
texture are of great utility in conveying fruits, bread, etc., whilst
heavier articles, or such as require a more compact covering, are
carried in bags of leather, or skin.—<span class="smcap">Hasselquist’s</span> <i>Voyage</i>, p. 26.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_114" name="Note_251b" id="Note_251b">
<span class="smcap">Page 251.</span></a> <i>... the caliph presented himself to the emir in a new light</i></h4>

<p>The propensity of a vicious person, in affliction, to seek consolation
from the ceremonies of religion, is an exquisite trait in the
character of Vathek.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_115" name="Note_255a" id="Note_255a">
<span class="smcap">Page 255.</span></a> <i>... the waving of fans</i></h4>

<p>These fans consisted of the trains of peacocks or ostriches, whose
quills were set in a long stem, so as to imbricate the plumes in the
gradations of their natural growth. Fans of this fashion were
formerly used in England.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_116" name="Note_256a" id="Note_256a">
<span class="smcap">Page 256.</span></a> <i>... wine hoarded up in bottles, prior to the birth of
Mahomet</i></h4>

<p>The prohibition of wine by the Prophet materially diminished its
consumption within the limits of his own dominions. Hence a
reserve of it might be expected of the age here specified. The
custom of hoarding wine was not unknown to the Persians, though
not so often practised by them as by the Greeks and the Romans.</p>

<p>“I purchase” (says Lebeid) “the old liquor, at a dear rate, in
dark leathern bottles, long reposited; or in casks black with pitch,
whose seals I break, and then fill the cheerful goblet.”—<i>Moallakat</i>,
p. 53.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_117" name="Note_256b" id="Note_256b">
<span class="smcap">Page 256.</span></a> <i>... excavated ovens in the rock</i></h4>

<p>As substitutes for the portable ovens, which were lost.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_118" name="Note_257a" id="Note_257a">
<span class="smcap">Page 257.</span></a> <i>... her great camel Alboufaki</i></h4>

<p>There is a singular and laboured description of a camel in the
poem of <i>Tarafa</i>; but Alboufaki possessed qualities appropriate to
himself, and which rendered him but little less conspicuous than
the deformed dun camel of Aad.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_119" name="Note_257b" id="Note_257b">
<span class="smcap">Page 257.</span></a> <i>... to set forward, notwithstanding it was noon</i></h4>

<p>The employment of woodfellers was accounted of all others the
most toilsome, as those occupied in it were compelled to forgo that
mid-day cessation with which other labourers were indulged.
Inatulla speaks proverbially of “woodmen in the meridian hour,
scarce able to raise the arms of languor.” The guides of Carathis
being of this occupation, she adroitly availed herself of it to urge
them forward, without allowing them that repose during the mid-day
fervour which travellers in these climates always enjoyed, and
which was deemed so essential to the preservation of their health.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_120" name="Note_258a" id="Note_258a">
<span class="smcap">Page 258.</span></a> <i>... the confines of some cemetery</i></h4>

<p>Places of interment in the East were commonly situated in scenes
of solitude. We read of one in the History of the First Calender,
abounding with so many monuments, that four days were successively
spent in it without the inquirer being able to find the tomb
he looked for; and, from the story of Ganem, it appears that the
doors of these cemeteries were often left open.—<i>Arabian Nights</i>,
vol. ii, p. 112; vol. iii, p. 135.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_121" name="Note_260a" id="Note_260a">
<span class="smcap">Page 260.</span></a> <i>... a Myrabolan comfit</i></h4>

<p>The invention of this confection is attributed by M. Cardonne to
Avicenna, but there is abundant reason, exclusive of our author’s
authority, to suppose it of a much earlier origin. Both the Latins
and Greeks were acquainted with the balsam, and the tree that
produced it was indigenous in various parts of Arabia.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_122" name="Note_261a" id="Note_261a">
<span class="smcap">Page 261.</span></a> <i>... blue fishes</i></h4>

<p>Fishes of the same colour are mentioned in the <i>Arabian Nights</i>;
and, like these, were endowed with the gift of speech.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_123" name="Note_262a" id="Note_262a">
<span class="smcap">Page 262.</span></a> <i>... waving streamers on which were inscribed the names
of Allah and the Prophet</i></h4>

<p>The position that “there is no God but God, and Mahomet is his
Prophet,” pervades every part of the Mahometan religion. Banners,
like those here described, are preserved in the several mosques;
and, on the death of extraordinary persons, are borne before the
bier in solemn state.—<i>Religious Ceremonies</i>, vol. vii, pp. 119, 120.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_124" name="Note_263a" id="Note_263a">
<span class="smcap">Page 263.</span></a> <i>... astrolabes</i></h4>

<p>The mention of the astrolabe may be deemed incompatible, at
first view, with chronological exactness, as there is no instance
of any being constructed by a Mussulman, till after the time of
Vathek. It may, however, be remarked, to go no higher, that
Sinesius, bishop of Ptolemais, invented one in the fifth century;
and that Carathis was not only herself a Greek, but also cultivated
those sciences which the good Mussulmans of her time all held
in abhorrence.—<span class="smcap">Bailly</span>, <i>Hist. de l’Astronom. Moderne</i>, tom, i,
pp. 563, 573.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_125" name="Note_264a" id="Note_264a">
<span class="smcap">Page 264.</span></a> <i>On the banks of the stream, hives and oratories</i></h4>

<p>The bee is an insect held in high veneration amongst the Mahometans,
it being pointed out in the Koran, “for a sign unto the people
that understand.” It has been said, in the same sense, “Go to
the ant, thou sluggard.”—Proverbs, vi, 6. The santons, therefore,
who inhabit the fertile banks of Rocnabad, are not less famous
for their hives than their oratories.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 717.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_126" name="Note_265a" id="Note_265a">
<span class="smcap">Page 265.</span></a> <i>... sheiks ... cadis</i></h4>

<p>Sheiks are the chiefs of the societies of dervishes; cadis are the
magistrates of a town or city.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_127" name="Note_265b" id="Note_265b">
<span class="smcap">Page 265.</span></a> <i>Asses in bridles of riband inscribed from the Koran</i></h4>

<p>As the judges of Israel in ancient days rode on white asses, so,
amongst the Mahometans, those that affect an extraordinary
sanctity use the same animal in preference to the horse. Sir John
Chardin observed, in various parts of the East, that their reins, as
here represented, were of silk, with the name of God, or other
inscriptions, upon them.—<span class="smcap">Ludeke</span>, <i>Expos. brevis</i>, p. 49. <span class="smcap">Chardin’s</span>
MS. cited by Harmer.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_128" name="Note_266a" id="Note_266a">
<span class="smcap">Page 266.</span></a> <i>One of these beneficent genii, assuming the exterior of a
shepherd, etc., began to pour from his flute, etc.</i></h4>

<p>The flute was considered as a sacred instrument, which Jacob
and other holy shepherds had sanctified by using.—<i>Religious
Ceremonies</i>, vol. vii, p. 110.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_129" name="Note_266b" id="Note_266b">
<span class="smcap">Page 266.</span></a> <i>... involuntarily drawn towards the declivity of
the hill</i></h4>

<p>A similar instance of attraction may be seen in the Story of Prince
Ahmed and the Peri Parabanou.—<i>Arabian Nights</i>, vol. iv, p. 243.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_130" name="Note_267a" id="Note_267a">
<span class="smcap">Page 267.</span></a> <i>Eblis</i></h4>

<p>D’Herbelot supposes this title to have been a corruption of the
Greek <ins class="grk" title="Diabolos">Διαβολος</ins>, <i>diabolos</i>. It was the appellation conferred by the
Arabians upon the prince of the apostate angels, whom they represent
as exiled to the infernal regions, for refusing to worship Adam
at the command of the Supreme, and appears more likely to
originate from the Hebrew <ins class="hbw" title="HBL">הבל</ins> <i>hebel</i>, vanity, pride.—See below,
the note, p. 305, “<i>Creatures of clay.</i>”</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_131" name="Note_267b" id="Note_267b">
<span class="smcap">Page 267.</span></a> <i>... compensate for thy impieties by an exemplary life</i></h4>

<p>It is an established article of the Mussulman creed, that the
actions of mankind are all weighed in a vast unerring balance,
and the future condition of the agents determined according to
the preponderance of evil or good. This fiction, which seems to
have been borrowed from the Jews, had probably its origin in the
figurative language of Scripture. Thus, Psalm lxii, 9: “Surely
men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie:
to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity”;
and in Daniel, the sentence against the King of Babylon, inscribed
on the wall, “Thou art weighed in the balance, and found
wanting.”</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_132" name="Note_268a" id="Note_268a">
<span class="smcap">Page 268.</span></a> <i>Balkis</i></h4>

<p>This was the Arabian name of the Queen of Sheba, who went
from the south to hear the wisdom and admire the glory of Solomon.
The Koran represents her as a worshipper of fire. Solomon is
said not only to have entertained her with the greatest magnificence,
but also to have raised her to his bed and his throne.—<i>Al Koran</i>,
ch. xxvii, and <span class="smcap">Sale’s</span> notes. <span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 182.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_133" name="Note_270a" id="Note_270a">
<span class="smcap">Page 270.</span></a> <i>The pavement, strewed over with saffron</i></h4>

<p>There are several circumstances in the Story of the Third Calender,
that resemble those here mentioned; particularly a pavement
strewed with saffron, and the burning of ambergris and aloes-wood.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_134" name="Note_271a" id="Note_271a">
<span class="smcap">Page 271.</span></a> <i>Ouranbad</i></h4>

<p>This monster is represented as a fierce-flying hydra, and belongs
to the same class with the <i>rakshe</i>, whose ordinary food was serpents
and dragons; the <i>soham</i>, which had the head of a horse, with four
eyes, and the body of a flame-coloured dragon; the <i>syl</i>, a basilisk
with a face resembling the human, but so tremendous that no
mortal could bear to behold it; the <i>ejder</i>, and others. See these
respective titles in <span class="smcap">Richardson’s</span> <i>Persian, Arabic, and English
Dictionary</i>.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_135" name="Note_272a" id="Note_272a">
<span class="smcap">Page 272.</span></a> <i>Creatures of clay</i></h4>

<p>Nothing could have been more appositely imagined than this
compellation. Eblis, according to Arabian mythology, had suffered
a degradation from his primeval rank, and was consigned to these
regions, for having refused to worship Adam in obedience to the
supreme command; alleging, in justification of his refusal, that
himself had been formed of ethereal fire, whilst Adam was only
a creature of clay.—<i>Al Koran</i>, c. lv, etc.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_136" name="Note_272b" id="Note_272b">
<span class="smcap">Page 272.</span></a> <i>... the fortress of Aherman</i></h4>

<p>In the mythology of the Easterns, Aherman was accounted <i>the
Demon of Discord</i>. The ancient Persian romances abound in descriptions
of this fortress, in which the inferior demons assemble, to
receive the behests of their prince; and from whom they proceed to
exercise their malice in every part of the world.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>, p. 71.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_137" name="Note_272c" id="Note_272c">
<span class="smcap">Page 272.</span></a> <i>... the halls of Argenk</i></h4>

<p>The halls of this mighty dive, who reigned in the mountains of
Kaf, contained the statues of the seventy-two Solimans, and the
portraits of the various creatures subject to them; not one of which
bore the slightest similitude to man. Some had many heads,
others many arms, and some consisted of many bodies. Their
heads were all very extraordinary, some resembling the elephant’s,
the buffalo’s, and the boar’s; whilst others were still more monstrous.—<span class="smcap">D’Herbelot</span>,
p. 820. Some of the idols worshipped to this day
in Hindostan answer to this description.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_138" name="Note_272d" id="Note_272d">
<span class="smcap">Page 272.</span></a> <i>... holding his right hand, motionless, on his heart</i></h4>

<p>Sandys observes that the application of the right hand to the
heart is the customary mode of Eastern salutation; but the perseverance
of the votaries of Eblis in this attitude was intended to
express their devotion to him both heart and hand.</p>

<p></p>

<h4><a href="#Note_139" name="Note_273a" id="Note_273a">
<span class="smcap">Page 273.</span></a> <i>In my lifetime I filled, etc.</i></h4>

<p>This recital agrees perfectly with those in the Koran, and other
Arabian legends.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_140" name="Note_274a" id="Note_274a">
<span class="smcap">Page 274.</span></a> <i>... an unrelenting fire preys on my heart</i></h4>

<p>Hariri, to convey the most forcible idea of extreme anxiety,
represents the heart as tormented by fierce burning coals. This
form of speech, it is observed, is <i>proverbial</i>; but do we not see
whence the proverb arose?—<span class="smcap">Chappelow’s</span> <i>Six Assemblies</i>, p. 106.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_141" name="Note_275a" id="Note_275a">
<span class="smcap">Page 275.</span></a> <i>Carathis on the back of an afrit</i></h4>

<p>The expedition of the afrit in fetching Carathis is characteristic
of this order of dives. We read in the Koran that another of the
fraternity offered to bring the Queen of Sheba’s throne to Solomon
before he could rise from his place.—Ch. xxvii.</p>

<h4><a href="#Note_142" name="Note_277a" id="Note_277a">
<span class="smcap">Page 277.</span></a> <i>... glanced off in a rapid whirl that rendered her
invisible</i></h4>

<p>It was not ill conceived to punish Carathis by a rite, and one
of the principal characteristics of that science in which she so much
delighted, and which was the primary cause of Vathek’s perdition
and of her own. The circle, the emblem of eternity, and the symbol
of the sun, was held sacred in the most ancient ceremonies of incantations;
and the whirling round deemed as a necessary operation
in magical mysteries. Was not the name of the greatest enchantress
in fabulous antiquity, Circe, derived from <ins class="grk" title="kirkos">κιρκος</ins>, a circle, on
account of her magical revolutions, and of the circular appearance
and motion of the sun, her father? The fairies and elves used to
arrange themselves in a ring on the grass; and even the augur, in
the liturgy of the Romans, whirled round to encompass the four
cardinal points of the world. It is remarkable, that a derivative
of the verb, rendered, <i>to whirl in a magical manner</i> (<a href="#Page_257">see page 257</a>),
which corresponds to the Hebrew <ins class="hbw" title="SHR">סחר</ins>, and is interpreted <i>scindere,
secare se in orbem, inde notio circinandi, mox gyrandi, et hinc à
motu versatili, fascinavit, incantavit</i>, signifies in the Koran
<i>the glimmering of twilight</i>: a sense deducible from the shapeless
glimpses of objects when hurried round with the velocity here
described, and very applicable to the sudden disappearance of
Carathis, who, like the stone in a sling, by the progressive and rapid
increase of the circular motion, soon ceased to be perceptible.
Nothing can impress a greater awe upon the mind than does this
passage in the original.</p>

<div class="tn">
<h2 class="tnote">
<a name="tn_cont" id="tn_cont">Transcriber’s Note, continued:</a></h2>

<p>Inconsistent or obsolete spelling has not been changed.</p>

<p>Asterisks indicating notes to <i>Vathek</i> were added by the transcriber.</p>

<p>The following changes were also made to the text:</p>

<div class="corrections">
<p>Title Page: missing round bracket added (after “d. 1946”)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_15">p. 15</a>: happy valley to Happy Valley (his design to leave the Happy Valley)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_51">p. 51</a>: f to if (and, if it were possible)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_75">p. 75</a>: double quote to single quote (to devolve it upon thee.’)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_80">p. 80</a>: thyself.” to thyself.’” (so worthy as thyself.’”)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_88">p. 88</a>: bu to but (but they are soon disentangled)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_116">p. 116</a>: melanchoy to melancholy (a grave and melancholy air.)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_136">p. 136</a>: marrriage to marriage (in suitable marriage.)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_157">p. 157</a>: by to be (Heaven be thy guide!)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_161">p. 161</a>: af to of (but an enemy of Manfred.)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_176">p. 176</a>: H to He (He learned with indignation)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_194">p. 194</a>: were to was (An account of these travels was published)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_194">p. 194</a>: <i>Amezia</i> to <i>Azemia</i></p>
<p><a href="#Page_226">p. 256</a>: duing to during (during her continuance in favour,)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_263">p. 263</a>: missing close quote added (such an explosion!”)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_266">p. 266</a>: then to than (clearer than crystal)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_273">p. 273</a>: ominious to ominous (this ominous preliminary)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_281">p. 281</a>: δάημων to δαήμων</p>
<p><a href="#Page_286">p. 286</a>: east to west (from east to west)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_286">p. 286</a>: Delavel’s to Delaval’s (Delaval’s <i>Inquiry concerning the Changes of Colours, etc.</i>)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_292">p. 292</a>: extra period deleted (το ἡδιστον του ΕΑΡΟΣ.)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_300">p. 300</a>: missing close quote added (y atónito estava.”)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_302">p. 302</a>: wood-fellers to woodfellers (The employment of woodfellers)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_303">p. 303</a>: missing space added (<span class="smcap">Page 264.</span>)</p>
<p><a href="#Page_304">p. 304</a>: הבר to הבל</p>
<p><a href="#Page_306">p. 306</a>: κιρχος to κιρκος</p>
</div>
</div>










</body>
</html>